Harvest Moon : Friends of Mineral Town
Harvest Moon : More Friends of Mineral Town

Written by         : Franck Knight
Started on         : March 13th, 2006
First Submitted on : June 4th, 2010
Version            : 0.2

========
Foreword
========

Welcome to my small guide to Harvest Moon for GBA. As I start writing this, I 
have no intention of turning this into a full blown guide. There are more than 
enough character guides and methods to befriend the people, you just pick one 
that seems to suit you. What I wanted to write at first is a sort of guide to 
start the game. Since both games are roughly the same, with a few exceptions, 
the methods can be used in either versions.

Just as a reminder :
Boy Version = FoMT
Girl Version = MFoMT
Both way of naming can be seen in this guide.

=================
Table of Contents
=================

1.  Basic Controls
2.  Harvest Moon at a Glance
3.  Tools
4.  Crop Basic
5.  Animals Basic
6.  Mining Basic
7.  Fishing
8.  Weather
9.  Passing Time
10. Making Money
11. Mineral Town
12. Harvest Sprites
13. Wedding Blues
14. Useful Tricks
15. Festivals
16. Spring First Year
17. Summer First Year
18. Fall First Year
19. Winter First Year
20. Second Year
21. Third year and up
22. Gameshark Code
23. End word and Disclaimer
24. Version History

==============
Basic Controls
==============
As the title says, I'll try to explain how to work the controls out for every 
task you'll have to do.

--Menus--
Control Pad : Move selection arrow, scroll up/down, turn page
Select      : 
Start       : 
A           : Select the option
B           : Cancel / Previous Screen
L           : Speed up the scrolling up/down
R           : Speed up the scrolling up/down

--Farm - Empty Handed--
Control Pad : Move Character
Select      : Open Earning Screen
Start       : Open/Close Main Menu
A           : Lift up item, Check Item, Talk
B           : Use Equipped Tool
L           : Whistle for Dog/Horse
R           : Run/Walk

You can change the Run/Walk option in the Diary screen.

L + A       : Pull item out of Rucksack
L + B       : Cycle tool in hand from Rucksack
A + B       : Opens Rucksack Menu

In the rucksack, pressing Start on an item will give you a choice to toss it 
out. It doesn't count as littering when you do.

Keeping B pressed down also lets you turn around on yourself, but when you let 
go, you'll use the tool equipped.

--Farm - Item in Hand--

Control Pad : Move character
Select      : Open Earning Screen
Start       : Open/Close Main Menu
A           : Check Item (in front), Give Item, Talk, 
              Throw Item, Put Item in Bin, Put Item Down
B           : Put item in Rucksack (if possible)
L           : Nothing
R           : Run/Walk

L + A       : Cycle object in hand from Rucksack
L + B       : Eat item (if edible)
A + B       : Open Rucksack

The A Button does alot of things, as you can see, but it depends on the 
situation. For example :
Holding Milk in front of the Cheese Maker will turn it into Cheese, but if 
you're holding anything else, you'll just examine the Maker instead. In certain 
events, characters won't accept gifts so even holding something, you'll just be 
talking to them.

Some items can be put on the ground, like branches or wood pieces for fences, 
but only your field. Otherwise the item falls on the ground and disapears. Most 
items can't be put down thought, like food. Some items can be put down anywhere,
such as your animals (Dog, Chicken).

Holding something allows you to check your mailbox, but if there's something in 
the mail, like some Wine gift, you'll note that nothing happens, not even a 
message that says 'no mail'. You'll need to drop the item first.

========================
Harvest Moon at a Glance
========================

Harvest Moon is just another game in the long tradition of Farm caretaking games
Natsume has made. But this is easily one of the most detailed versions there has
been up to now. There's lots of things to do outside of crops and animals, you 
won't get bored as the seasons play a bigger role.

So what exactly can you do?

We'll get into the details in the walkthrough, but you'll obviously need to work
on the farm itself at first. You need a steady cash flow to work, if only to buy
the seeds needed to grow crops. 

The field is in a bad shape, so to clean it you will need to improve your tools.
And once its cleaned you'll have to plan on having grass for animals. And when 
you get animals you need to take care of them everyday so their affection will 
rise and give you better products, worth a better price everyday.

And that's only the farm, because you can get more money by digging the mines as
well. But you're not alone either, there's a whole village of people living 
their lives everyday, that can all help you in one way or another. You'll want 
to befriend many of them with gifts, including Harvest Sprites that can directly
help you with your crops and animals everyday.

And then you'll want to find someone, and marry him/her eventually. You'll get 
to help the others marry in the village as well. Everyone has their own little 
life, and you're the new addition to it.

=====
Tools 
=====
You have many tools at your disposition, but start with only 6. The box in the 
lower right corner of your house is the tool box, you can hold 64 tools in 
there. The box contains the starting 6 tools, but there are quite a few more to 
get. Here's a list of them all.

Most tools have a 'charge up' motion, when you level them up. Simply pressing 
the button, even if its at max level, will still only result in a 'level 1 hit'.
If you want to use the 'level 2' ability, you need to charge it up. You'll see 
your character's motion change slightly as you charge up. Every change of stance
means a different level of power.

--Hammer--
The Hammer is a versatile tool. It breaks the smaller rocks in your field, but 
also those in the mine when you go for some ore hunting. You can also use it to 
flatten some piece of fence. Its the only way to get rid of the rotten pieces, 
but it can also make good parts disapear.

At Copper, you can break the round rocks in your field too. It will take 6 
   charged hits thought.
At Silver, you can now break the round rocks in 3 hits, but also the big 
   boulders in 6 hits.
At Golden, you can break round rocks in 1 hit, and boulders in 3 hits.
At Mystrile, you can break round rocks and boulders in 1 hit.
At Cursed/Blessed, all boulders on the map will disapear with a single hit. 
   There are a few exceptions to this I think.
At Mythic, I don't know as I write this. Hopefully in the revision, yet I don't 
   know how stronger this can become.

Note that the extra levels of power don't work in the mines, so don't bother 
charging up.

--Hoe--
Another useful tool, this lets you tile your field to allow planting seeds. 
Throwing seeds on untiled ground makes them lost. But on tiled seed, they are 
ready to grow. You can also retile grass when its freshly cut off, if you need 
to change your layout. Also, the Hoe lets you dig in the mines, for stairs 
going down, money or black herbs.

At normal, it tiles one square.
At Copper, it tiles two squares in a line.
At Silver, it tiles three squares in a line.
At Golden, it tiles four squares in a line.
At Mystrile, it tiles six squares in a line.
At Cursed/Blessed, it tiles a row of 12 long per 3 wide, with you as the center 
   of the width.
At Mythic, not sure again, bur probably even longer and wider, yeesh.

Here again, its not use charging it up in the mines.

--Axe--
With only one obvious use, you don't need a manual for this. Cut wood, simply.

At normal, you can only cut the small branches.
At Copper, 6 hits can clear a stump.
At Silver, 3 hits clear a stump.
At Golden, 2 Hits clear a stump.
At Mystrile, 1 hit clear a stump.
At Cursed/Blessed, 1 hit clears the whole map you're in.
At Mythic, I don't see how better this can become.

--Scythe--
This is your main tool to take care of grass and weeds. Wild weeds will grow on 
your field randomly on non-seeded areas. You can cut them off with the Scythe or
throw them on the ground. But grass needs to be cut off. You can also use it to 
get rid of old crops when changing seasons.

At normal, one tile is cut.
At Copper, three tiles wide in front of you, with you in the center.
At Silver, three tiles wide and 2 tiles away are cut.
At Golden, a set of 3x3 tiles around you is cut, with you in the center.
At Mystrile, a set of 5x5 is cut, with you in the center.
At Cursed/Blessed, a square of 7x7 is cut off, with you in the center.
At Mythic, I suppose its 9x9. Pretty big.

--Watering Can--
Obviously, you'll use this to water the fields. The amount of water it contains 
grows with the levels as well, but you also cover more ground with a single 
action.

At normal, you water 1 tile in front of you.
At Copper, you water 3 tiles wide in front of you.
At Silver, you water 3x2 tiles in front of you.
At Golder, you water 3x3 tiles in front of you.
At Mystrile, you water 5x5 tiles in front of you.
At Cursed/Blessed, you'll water 7x7 tiles in front of you.
At Mythic, must be pretty big area.

--Fishing Rod--
As you can guess it, you can fish out of almost any body of water. The levels in
this case allow you to charge up to catch bigger fishes. At higher levels, 
you'll fish less junk and better fishes out. Some fishes can only be caught with
the best rods.

--Brush--
Lets you brush your sheeps, cows and horse, once a day each. Brush them all 
everyday to keep their affection rising.

--Milker--
Get the milk off of your adult cows every day.

--Clippers--
Get the wool off your sheeps once a week.

--Medecine--
Medecine is needed if your animals get sick. That can happen if you leave them 
outside when it rains, or if you don't need them for a few days. You might never
even have to buy this if you do well.

--Miracle potion--
This is a potion to use on your cows or sheep to have them pregnant. They need 
to be put in the stall for that purpose first thought.

--Seeds--
You can buy the seeds at the supermarket or Won's place at the beach. Each bag 
seeds and area of 3x3 with you as the center. So you must stand in the middle of
the 3x3 formation to seed them all.

--Podometer--
It just counts the number of steps while you carry it. It doesn't need to be 
equipped, just in your rucksack.

--Godess/Kappa Gems--
These special gems will make you recuperate your energy wihle holding it in your
hands (no need to use them). Goddess Gem will heal your Stamina, and Kappa Gem 
your Fatigue. Both heal about at the same rate that the hot bath would. Its 
mostly used to recuperate when out of the mine, while walking back to the farm 
you can just keep it on and it will heal you.

Since time doesn't pass in the mine or in houses, its only useful outside.

--Upgrading Tools--
The 6 basic tools can be upgraded. If you check your earning screen, one of the 
pages lists the tools and their current levels. A progress bar tells you how far
you are from being able to reforge it. Once a bar is full, a small colored rock 
appears under the bar, showing which kidn of ore you can use to upgrade it.

The progress bar moves only when you use it, and slowly at higher levels. Using 
it during festival doesn't work to level them up, but you can use them in the 
mine where time doesn't pass. The best way to level them is to go to the mine, 
use the tool repeatidly until you turn blue, and take a dip in the nearby hot 
bath for 2 hours.

Once you can reforge it, you need to get the needed ore out of the Spring Mine, 
and bring it to Saibara the blacksmith. He will reforge it for a price, but you
won't be able to use the tool for a few days while he's at work. Remember to 
come back to pick it up, he won't deliver it back to you.

One interesting thing to note is that you don't need to level them up in order, 
meaning from Iron to Copper to Silver to Gold. You can skip straight to the 
highest level, Mystrile. It will save you money and time in the end, because it 
will take only half as much money and half as many days total to reforge it.

And yes, Mystrile is the 'highest level' to upgrade through levels, as the 3 
others are acquired through special means. And also, the 3 higher levels don't 
replace your original tools, so you can keep your Mystrile tools. Read below for
those higher levels.

--Cursed and Blessed Tools--
These are special tools, as they aren't upgraded from the basic 6 ones. You need
to find the Cursed Tools in the Winter Mine, but they only appear once every 
basic tool are upgraded to Mystrile (that means reforged, not just leveled up). 
See the Mining Section for where to find them.

Cursed Tools can't be taken off once equipped, and even worse, they drain 
stamina like no tomorrow when used. They aren't advisable to use at all because 
of that. The only way to take them off is waiting for a Confessional day at the 
church (Monday, Wednesday or Rainy/Snowy days between 1pm and 4pm) and ask 
Carter to remove it for 1000G.

The Blessed Tools are when the curse has been removed off them. They have 
exactly the same power, but without the huge stamina drain and limitation to
unequipping them. How to remove the curse depends on the tool :

The Hoe and Watering Can can be uncursed by going on those confessional days and
removing the curse 10 times. It costs 1000G every time, so all that is needed 
for this is money.

The Hammer and Sickle needs to be equipped and never removed for 10 days 
straight. This can be a problem if not done in winter. In winter all you need 
to take care of are your animals, so ask for a sprite to lend a hand with them. 
On the 11th's morning, the curse will be lifted. You don't need to equip the 
Cursed item before the end of the day. It counts the number of times you sleep, 
not the number of hours.

The Axe and Fishing Rod can be uncursed after being used 255 times. Of course, 
with the huge stamina drain, this is almost impossible. But there is one trick. 
Alot of Festivals (Horse Racing, New Year Events...) have the 'unlimited 
energy' tag, which means you can use any tool as much as you want and you 
won't pass out. Bring them with you on such an event, and use it over and over 
until they both get uncursed.

--Mythic Tools--
The most powerful tools in the game, are possibly the hardest to get. By the 
time you got them all, they are possibly not as useful anymore either. But for 
completion sake...

You need to get all of your tools to Blessed state first, else you can't find 
the needed materials. The materials are the Mythic Stones, mentionned in the 
Mining Guide. They are rare stones indeed. Saibara will request one along with 
50000G (ouch) and 2 days worth of work. You probably will wait a good while for 
these, but its not necessary either. Most Blessed tools are more than sufficient
for the work needed.

===========
Crops basic
===========
The thing to know about farming is planning a little about the space. At first, 
your watering can is weak, you won't be able to water more than a space at a 
time. What does that mean in practice? Means that you'll need to walk beside 
each tile to water them. Later on you'll have means of watering more, but for 
now, this is the basic.

You'll want to keep one of many formations in mind, and use the one that you 
find easiest simply. Your seed bag covers this area at most :

XXX
XXX
XXX Block

I call it the Block formation, or 9-tile. The problem is that when the plants 
are grown enough, you won't get to water the middle tile. So at first you don't 
want to use this formation. Some will argue that you can water the middle when 
you harvest the rest, but how will you replant the tiles if you can't stand in 
the middle tile?

So you will want to use 8- or 7-tile formations. Of course I would suggest 8 
tiles for maximum profit, but you might just choose to do it differently. 
Possible formations :

XXX        X X          X X
X X        XXX          X X
XXX        XXX          XXX
Donut      Shallow-U    Deep-U

I suggest the Donut or Shallow-U. The advantage of the Shallow-U is that you 
won't be 'jumping' to the middle tile by accident. I find that a bit annoying, 
but its not that much of a concern.

In your field, you'll want to have space to walk around them, so you'll have 
to tile like this :
X = Crop
- = Free space

---------      ---------
-XXX-XXX-      -XXX-XXX-
-XX---XX-      -X-X-X-X-
-XXX-XXX-      -XXX-XXX-
---------  or  ---------

You need at least a Silver Watering Can to reach the middle of a Block 
formation, else keep it this way.

Each crop grows in a certain season and at a certain speed. Turnips for example 
take 4 days from being planted to being harvested. That means that if you plant 
on the 1st, you'll harvest on the 5th. Some plants regrow without needing to be 
seeded, in which case they take less time to regrow than from being seeded. For 
example, Sweet Potatoes take 5 days to harvest, but then you'll have a new 
harvest every 2 days.

For that purpose, I've made several tools for you. First of, a small crop chart,
giving you quick info about the kind of crops you can plant in that season. The 
second tool, a calendar to monitor your crops harvest times, which will help you
when you'll require the help of Sprites or to plan on certain events.

So here are the crops charts. The price is per bag. When a crop doesn't regrow, 
remember that you need to reseed, which you can do as soon as you've harvested 
the crops out.

The "Ripe In" lets you know how many days it takes for the first harvest. The 
Harvest column tells you how many times you'll harvest it at most in the season,
so you can plan on buying the extra bags. Sell for is the individual price per 
crop. 

The last 3 columns are net profit. Net profit is calculated by each 3x3 block 
you'll seed. The number representant a single block for a whole season. It 
counts the number of bags you'll need to buy, the number of harvests you'll 
have and the price per crop you'll sell.

This means that if you planted 3 blocks of Turnips, 8-tiles, you'll get 7560 
total in profit at the end of Spring, if planted early enough in the season. The
Optimum Column tells you which date you should plant it at most to get the 
maximum harvests in a month. Knowing which Crops are most important to seed 
first can be useful if you're a bit short on money for a day.

Here's an example of how the profit is calculated for Turnips :
120G x 7 bags  = 840G cost in seeds per 3x3 tile for the whole month
9 Tiles x 60G per turnip sold = 540G for a 3x3 set
540G x 7 Harvests = 3780 G per season
3780G - 840G for the seeds = 2940G profit

--Spring--
            Price  Ripe in  Harvests    Sell  9-Tile  8-Tile  7-Tile  Opt.
Turnip     : 120G   4 days  7            60G   2940G   2520G   2100G   2nd
Potato     : 150G   7 days  4            80G   2280G   1960G   1640G   2nd
Cucumber   : 200G   9 days  Regrow, 3    60G   1420G   1240G   1060G   1st
Cabbage    : 500G  14 days  2           250G   3500G   3000G   2500G   2nd
Strawberry :

--Summer--
            Price  Ripe in  Harvests    Sell  9-Tile  8-Tile  7-Tile  Opt.
Tomato     : 200G   9 days  Regrow, 7    60G   3580G   3160G   2740G   3rd
Corn       : 300G  14 days  Regrow, 5   100G   4400G   3900G   3400G   1st
Onion      : 150G   7 days  4            80G   2280G   1960G   1640G   2nd
Pineapple  : 1000G 20 days  Regrow, 2   500G   8000G   7000G   6000G   5th

--Fall--
            Price  Ripe in  Harvests    Sell  9-Tile  8-Tile  7-Tile   Opt.
Carrot     : 150G   7 days  4            60G   1560G   1320G   1080G   2nd
Eggplant   : 120G   9 days  Regrow, 7    80G   4920G   4360G   3800G   3rd 
S.Potato   : 300G   5 days  Regrow, 13  120G  13740G  12180G  10620G   1st
G.Pepper   : 150G   7 days  Regrow, 12   40G   4170G   3690G   3210G   1st

You can only buy the first 3 items on the lists from the supermarket. You can 
buy the 4th item from each season from Won. The 5th item is only available from 
the supermarket when you shipped 100 crops of the first 3 kinds each season. 
Don't worry about that in the first year thought, concentrate on getting some 
cash at first.

And here are the calendars for the seasons. These calendars show if you plant 
on the first of each month. Sometimes its not possible, like the first year, 
because you can't buy the seeds on the first day, so you can plant on the 
second at best. Just push 'down' every crops on these calendars as needed.

Use this calendar to plan when you need to buy new seeds, and when you'll need 
to harvest. This is good for planning on the sprites' help later in the game. 
The list only gives the names of the crops that will need to be harvested on 
that day, so check which ones you need to reseed and those that regrow.

I also added the birthdays of the townspeople for every month, so its easier to 
track. Names in () are their alternate birthdays of the bachelors of your 
version (girl or boy). If you picked the first date as your birthday, their 
birthday will become the alternate. The game makes sure you don't have exactly 
the same date by moving the bachelor's birthday by a few days.

And the Festivals are added so you can plan around them. Remember that shops 
are closed on festivals, so get what you need on the day before.

Lastly, remember that if you the calendars work if you plant on the first. If 
you can't, bump the list down for the needed amount of days.

--Spring--

1   New Year Festival       Plant Seeds
2
3
4   Bold
5                           Turnip
6        
7
8   Harvest Goddess, Kappa  Potato
9   (H. Goddess, Kappa)     Turnip
10                          Cucumber
11  Saibara 
12
13                          Turnip
14  Spring Thanksgiving
15  Staid                   Potato, Cabbage, Cucumber
16  Elli
17  Barley                  Turnip
18  Spring Horse Race
19  Lillia
20  (Elli)                  Cucumber
21                          Turnip
22  Cooking Festival        Potato
23
24
25                          Turnip, Cucumber
26  Aqua
27
28
29                          Turnip, Potato, Cabbage
30 Sasha                    Cucumber

--Summer--

1  Beach Day                Plant Seeds
2
3  Popuri
4  Harris
5        
6  Cliff      
7  Chicken Festival  
8                           Onion
9       
10 (Popuri, Cliff)          Tomato
11 Basil
12
13                          Tomato
14
15                          Corn, Onion
16 Timid                    Tomato
17 Ann, (Kai)
18                          Corn
19                          Tomato
20 Cow Festival
21                          Corn, Pineapple
22 Kai, (Ann)               Tomato, Onion
23
24 Fireworks Festival       Corn
25 Thomas                   Tomato
26                          Pineapple
27                          Corn
28                          Tomato
29 Zack                     Onion
30                          Corn

--Fall--

1                           Plant Seeds	
2  Gotz
3  Music Festival
4
5  Stu
6                           S.Potatoes
7        
8                           S.Potatoes, G.Peppers, Carrots
9  Harvest Festival
10 Hoggy                    Eggplants, S.Potatoes, G.Peppers
11 Manna
12                          S.Potatoes, G.Peppers
13 Mother Hill Festival     Eggplants
14 Chef                     S.Potatoes, G.Peppers
15 Karen                    Carrots
16                          Eggplants, S.Potatoes, G.Peppers
17 Doctor
18 Fall Horse Race          S.Potatoes, G.Peppers
19                          Eggplants
20 Carter, (Gourmet)        S.Potatoes, G.Peppers
21 Sheep Festival, Gourmet
22                          Eggplants, S.Potatoes, G.Peppers, Carrots
23 Anna, (Karen), (Rick)
24                          S.Potatoes, G.Peppers
25 (Doctor)                 Eggplants
26                          S.Potatoes, G.Peppers
27 Rick
28                          Eggplants, S.Potatoes, G.Peppers
29                          Carrots
30 Pumpkin Festival         S.Potatoes, G.Peppers

--Winter--

1
2
3
4
5
6  Gray
7
8
9
10
11 Doug
12
13 Ellen
14 Winter Thanksgiving
15 Duke
16
17
18 
19 Won
20 Mary
21 (Won)
22 Nappy
23 (Gray)
24 Starry Festival
25 Stocking Festival,  (Mary)
26 May
27
28
29 Jeff
30 New Year

--Grass--
Grass, while are seeded like crops, fall into a different category altogether.

-They don't need to be watered (thus 3x3 blocks are fine)
-They regrow on their own (even after winter)
-They can be cut once a week for bushels of food for your cows/sheeps.

Thus you'll want to plant many blocks so you can plan on having animals. 
Leaving the the Cows and Sheeps outside, one tile of fully grown grass will be 
eaten everyday, which is just as much as if you cut the piece and fed it to the 
animal yourself.

So you'll want more tiles just to cut them and make yourself a reserve for 
winter. The fenced area doesn't need to be very big, just plan for animals x 7 
days tiles minimum, so the grass has time to regrow. You'll 112 squares fenced 
at most for all 16 bar animals, the maximum you can have. If you want to know, 
that's 12.5 bags of grass (considering 3x3 squares, 12 bags = 108 tiles).

If you decide to remove grass tiles, you need to wait to cut it, or the first 
few days after winter. When grass is at the lowest, use the hoe to redig the 
tile and it won't grow there anymore.

=============
Animals basic
=============
There are 5 kinds of animals that will inhabit your farm.

--Dog--
Your dog starts as a pup, it'll be adult by Fall first year. It won't be able 
to do much at first, so keep it outside to make it happy, but keep it out of 
the rain. Lift it up and down once every day to raise its affection (its this 
game's way of petting apparently).

When it gets to adult, you can buy a frisbee form Won, and train it at the 
beach. Carry it on sunny days at the beach and check the sign near the beach 
house to start a Dog Disk mini-game. The bar starts low, but will increase 
through practice. 

From my observations, the bar only increases when the dog catches the disk, and 
the more distance it can catch the better. So try to aim for all near-max 
catches. Stop and save between each if you want. I would personally have made 
it increase the more you farther you make your dog run but anyway.

You can only train a few times a day, depending on your dog's affection. So 
save and reload until you get a maximum amount of catches everyday, so it will 
increase faster.

Your dog will also scare wild dogs away at night when trained enough at the 
disk.

Your dog won't get sick in the rain, but won't increase its affection as 
quickly. You don't need to feed it either.

--Horse--
Your horse starts as a kid, and will be useless. But you can talk to it and 
brush it everyday to increase its affection. It will become adult a full year 
after being given to you.

Once adult, it has saddle bags, which you can use as a shipping bin. You can 
also ride it, but only on your farm unfortunatly. You can't talk to it anymore, 
but you can keep brushing it for affection everyday.

Horses don't need to be fed, but keep it out of the rain still.

--Chicken--
The cheapest animal, not the best moneymaker but requires little work. They 
cost 1500G each from the farm. Just lift and drop everyday to increase 
affection.

You can either keep it outside, where it will feed on its own, or keep it 
inside, but then you need to buy feed or make some using corn and throwing it 
on the mill outside the coop for 30 pieces of chicken feed. Its only 10G each 
to buy thought. Remember to keep any animal out of the rain thought. They can 
get sick and unhappy if outside when raining or if not fed for a day.

If not sick or unhappy it will produce an egg everyday. The quality of the egg 
depends on its affection level. Normal, Good and High quality eggs are worth 
increasingly more.

In the coop, put an egg of any quality in the basket on the lower left side 
for it to turn into a chick 3 days later. So you only really need to buy a 
single chicken, and use its eggs to get more chickens.

When kept outside, you need a fence, so that wild dogs won't attack them. Make 
sure your fence has no rotten parts everyday. But its good to note that while 
inside, time doesn't flow so you can take the time needed to pet your chickens 
and take their eggs.

You can have 4 chickens at most, 8 once you upgraded the coop.

--Cow--
Cows are your best money maker as far as animals go, and costs 5000G each. 
Bushels are worth 20G each, but you can get some by cutting your grass patches 
when tall enough. But you can only put them outside if you have tall grass for 
them to feed on everyday. They only need one tile each day per cow/sheep to 
feed on.

As with any animals, keep them out of the rain if you want them outside, or 
else make sure they have their feed inside the barn everyday. 

Cows happy and in good health will produce Small, Medium and Large milk for 
you to ship everyday, if you use the milker on them.

If you push a cow in the upper left corner stall, and give it some miracle 
potion, they will be pregnant with a baby cow. But you will be unable to get 
any milk from them for that time. Its a bit more profitable to buy your cows 
instead. Cows bought give milk once adult, which is a full week after being 
bought.

Your barn can hold a maximum of 8 cow/sheep combination, and 16 once upgraded.

--Sheep--
Essentially, everything that applies to a cow applies to a sheep too, with a 
few exceptions.

-You can use the clippers on them to get their wool, once a week. 
-You can clip their wool off the day you buy them.
-They have their own miracle potion, but use the same stall for pregnancy.
-You can't give the miracle potion to a sheep that you clipped the wool off. 
 You need the wool on to impregnate them.

Otherwise they use the same food and same rules as cows for being outside.

============
Mining Basic
============
Mining is a good side to taking care of your crops. Time doesn't pass while 
standing in the mine, it only increases one minute each time you use stairs to 
go deeper, so unless you move down 10 floors, you probably won't see a time 
change.

Mining is a complex system to explain in a few words only. So let's start with 
the basic layout of the mine.

There are two mines, which contain different gems and ores. The spring mine is 
near the hot baths in the mountain, and avaliable all year long. The Lake mine 
is only available in winter when the lake is frozen over.

Both contain 255 floors. Some items can only be found in one or the other mine, 
on a given floor. Both both have the same layout rules for the floor sizes and 
rock density. There are three rules for the sizes, in order of importance :

1- If the floor number is multiple of 5 (5, 10, 15), it will be the biggest 
   room, about 2.5 screens across by 2.5 screens high. The rock density is low, 
   so its not too hard to move around.

2- If the floor number is multiple of 3 (but not of 5) (3, 6, 9, 12, 18), the 
   room will be about 2 screens high by 1 screen across, but the rock density 
   is the highest here. You'll often find yourself trapped in rocks here.

3- If none of the above, a standard 1x1 screen with a relatively low density of 
   rocks.

Both mines follow a few more rules as well :

-DownStairs never appear one tile away from the UpStairs : XXX
                                                           XoX
                                                           XXX
-Downstairs never appear on the tiles next to the walls.
-All floors are randomly generated, down to the contents of the rocks/ground. 
 Using the downstairs randomize the next one. Thus reloading the previous floor 
 and using the same stairs would end up with a different room with different 
 rock layout and content (ores, gems). It also means that reloading the same 
 floor from a save, the room wouldn't have changed at all.
-All floors may contain more than one stairs down, but sometimes might have 
 none. You can test the multiple stairs by reloading the same floor save, and 
 purposely skipping the stairs. You might find another set on the same floor. 
 But only one stairs can be found at a time.
-All floors can contain some herbs as well, even in spots where the stairs 
 can't be. If you're using the AS/BS method, dig everywhere to get many herbs.

Baring those, you can follow two methods to go very deep in the mine with a 
mimimum of stamina/fatigue loss. The 2-save method (That I call AS/BS, the 
AfterStars/BeforeStairs system), or the 1-save method. The AS/BS is way safer 
to use and is also much more convenient when looking for certain prizes in 
particular.

--AS/BS procedure--

1- Save on the floor before you take the downstairs or before entering the 
   mine (BS)
2- Take the stairs down, and look for the rock formations on the new floor. 
   You need enough diggable space that stairs might appear in (look at the 
   rules about the stairs position I mentionned before).
3- If you don't have any space without having to break rocks, reload your BS 
   and to back to Step 2.
4- If you have enough diggable space for stairs, save your AS, 
5- Start digging. Dig everywhere, including where stairs wouldn't be, 
   looking for stairs AND Black Herbs. Just remember the position of each for 
   now.
6- If there were no stairs, reload the BS and return to step 2. If you found 
   some, continue to step 7.
7- Reload your AS, and dig ONLY the spots with the stairs and herbs.
8- Go back to Step 1

The trick will save you the most energy because you basically don't ever need 
to hammer your way out of rocks. You might need to reload quite a few times on 
the x3 floors thought. And you will dig only 2-3 times each floor, which 
you'll quickly replenish with the black herbs. Even if you don't find herbs on 
a floor, you'll find 1-3 on other floors to compensate.

The trick basically means this : If you don't find what you need on a floor, 
you reload the previous floor to randomize it again. If you find what you need, 
to reload the same floor so that everything will be in the same positions as 
before.

The BS will randomize the floor again.
The AS will keep the floor you're on as it was when you entered/saved.

Because of that, you'll be using this trick to also seek out the special items. 
Then you'll add this procedure in :

4a. Instead of looking for stairs, dig or smash rocks to find the item you want.
4b. If you don't find the item, reload the BS, return to Step 2 again.
4c. If you find the item, reload the AS, and dig/smash on where the item is 
    (or a path to it if need to).
4d. Save a new AS, and continue to step 5.

This way you'll ensure that you got what you wanted. Note that due to the 
randomization, sometimes a floor WON'T have the item its supposed to have, 
just like sometimes there are no stairs. So if you don't find it, reload the 
BS and dig again until you find it and stairs going down.

--Single Save Procedure--
With this method, you're relying a bit more on luck, and you'll want to carry 
down with you some energy boosting items, such as Lunch Box, Elli Leaves, 
Bodygizer(or XL) and TurobJolt(or XL). You won't be able to count on getting 
the stairs in a single dig this time, so this is the other way.

1- Save on the floor before taking the stairs down.
2- Look for enough space to dig where stairs might appear.
3- If you don't have enough space, reload your save.
4- If you have enough space, dig for the stairs.
5- Once you found the stairs down, return to Step 1 to save.

If you don't seem to find the stairs within a low amount of digs, reload 
anyway and try again. Eventually you'll find the stairs within 2-3 digs. 
Don't diss out herbs if you find some, eat them right away and keep looking 
for stairs.

Since you can't 'remember' the position of items here, you'll have to rely on 
luck solely. And if you can't find the special item before your energy runs 
out, just reload until you find it quickly enough. I don't suggest finding 
more than one special item at a time because of that, unless you're carrying 
some means of restoring energy.

--Spring Mine--
Now for the content of each mine. The spring mine being avalable all year 
around isn't that much of a money maker. The Copper are worth only 15G, and 
the best ores are found floor 10 and below, worth 50g. Which means a single 
trip with a full bakset will be worth 1500G at most.

Copper             15G     All Floors
Silver             20G     All Floors
Gold               30G     Floors 3+
Mystrile           40G     Floors 5+
Orihalcum          50G     Floors 10+
Adamantite         50G     Floors 10+
Mythic Stone    20000G     Same floors as Goddess Jewels
Goddess Jewels             Floors 60, 102, 123, 152, 155, 171, 190, 202 and 222
Teleport Stone             Floor 255

These are all found in rocks.

Power Berry           Floor 100
French Fries Recipe   Floor 255

These are found by digging.

The Goddess Jewels, when the 9th is found, will combine into the Goddess Gem, 
which when equipped as a tool, will recuperate Stamina with time. It doesn't 
work in the mine since time doesn't pass. You don't need to be carrying all 9 
thought. Even if some are in your house, they will still combine. As long as 
you have a free tool slot! That's very important to keep a tool slot open when 
you purposely go for the Goddess Jewels. The Jewels are plain items, but the 
Gem is a Tool.

The Mythic Stones only appear if you got every Blessed Tool first, which we'll 
explain later on. So don't bother looking for these at first. They appear 
rarely on those floors too. Sometimes you'll find none, sometimes you might 
find 2 or 3. But they only seem to appear on the same floors as the Goddess 
Jewels.

The Teleport Stone is a tool that appears only on the 3rd year, so no need to 
go that far yet either. And French Fries recipe, just get it at the same time 
as the Teleport Stone, really.

--Winter Mine--
This mine is only open in winter, as said previously. Beside the Junk Ore, the 
gem that is worth the LEAST is worth 55G. That's already better than the 
Spring mine. But the gem of lowest value found on the very first floor of the 
mine is worth 60G and the best 85G, so its worth 2550G for a full basket of 
that one. More than the Spring Mine for sure.

Amethyst         60G      All Floors
Agathe           62G      All Floors
Fluorite         65G      All Floors
Peridot          68G      All Floors
Emerald          70G      All Floors
Ruby             85G      All Floors
Sand Rose        60G      Floors ending in -9 (9, 19, 29...)
Moon Stone       55G      Floors ending in -8 (8, 18, 28...)
Diamond         100G      Floors ending in -0 (10, 20, 30...) with some 
                          exceptions 
Pink Diamond  10000G      Floors 30, 70, 90, 110, 130, 170, 190 and 255
Alexandrite   10000G      Floors 50, 100, 150 and 200 (unconfirmed for later 
                          floors)
Kappa Jewels              0, 40, 60, 80, 120, 140, 160, 180 and 255

These are all found in rocks. See below for additional notes on these.

Power Berry               Floor 19
Cursed Fishing Rod        Floor 29
Cursed Hoe                Floor 39
Cursed Ax                 Floor 49
Cursed Hammer             Floor 59
Cursed Watering Can       Floor 69
Cursed Sickle             Floor 79

These are all found by digging.

Pink Diamonds may appear on those floors, but sometimes they won't either. 
Sometimes you might find more than one on the same floor too. Use either save 
trick to ensure that you find at least one.

Alexandrites are special floors in the manner that they ONLY hold Alexandrites, 
if any. That means you will find no other gems on those floors, thus why its 
an exception for the diamonds. There might be more than one on a single floor 
too. Use the save tricks to find at least one.

Kappa Jewels follow the same rules as the Goddess Jewels. The Kappa Gem will 
heal back Fatigue with time pass.

The Cursed Tools are only found if all of your tools are upgraded to Mystrile. 
They won't appear if not. And a glitch apparently lets you find more than one 
Cursed Tool if that tool is already further leveled to Blessed, but there's no 
practical use to that.

--Mining profitably--
The only way to make it really worth the time is going to the winter mine and :

-Either dig down to 30 and get pink diamonds
-Or stay on the first floor and use the save trick to fill your basket only 
 with rubies, wasting a minimum of energy by saving on the first floor, finding 
 the rubies, reloading the save and smashing only the rocks with rubies inside. 
 Fill your basket like that for 2550G per trip, with minimal item/energy loss.

Digging down for pink diamonds is worth 10000G, but it might be more boring 
than just taking rubies out of the first floor. Only 4 full baskets of rubies 
would cover the price of a single Pink Diamonds, and you'll only use your 
hammer.

Mythic Stones are tempting, but they are very rare, and going down 60 floors 
for 1 or 2 is just as boring as Pink Diamonds, but can be done all year long.

Another way is getting Orihalcums and turning them into jewels by Saibara. He 
asks you 1000G for it, but you sell it 2000G. Comparing with the 50G you'd get 
if you shipped it, that's still 950G more. Problem is, you can only carry 8 at 
a time of course. But 8 broaches will be worth 7600G (8 x 950G), so its still 
worth the effort.

=======
Fishing
=======
There's probably people finding that fishing is nice, but I find it utterly 
boring personaly. You could spend a day fishing and still get scraps of 
earnings. That's why my fishing rod was leveled last. But I'm not excluding 
the potential of it anyway.

There are 6 main areas to fish :

-Mother Hill Lake
-Mother Hill River (north of the lake)
-Goddess Waterfall
-Ocean (Beach)
-Town River (goes along the farms south of town)
-9th Floor of Winter Mine

The goal in a fisher's life is eventually catching the big ones, the King Fish. 
There are one of them in each of the fishing areas, but some of them require 
some conditions to even have a chance at fishing them.

One of the best tricks to fish is using one of the two beach events to get a 
full basket of your choice. The time doesn't flow, and you have infinite 
stamina, so nothing will stop you from getting what you want.

Remember to avoid throwing fishes or thrash back in the ocean, it counts as 
littering, and everyone hates you a bit more every time. So instead, put them 
in your rucksack, and go press START when the pointer is on the item. You'll 
get rid of it, without littering. Its a bit longer, but at least no other bad 
things happen.

Here's a list of items that I've found by area fished :

Beach
=====
Branches
Tin can
Boots
Fish Bones
Sardine
Herring


=======
Weather
=======

Weather affects greatly your life on the farm. It's not to be underestimated 
either. People in the village also behave differently depending on the weather.
Like most, they avoid going on in bad weather. Certain weather effects might
cause destruction and chaos as well. It's important to know about this.

First of all, the TV in your living room has a weather channel, when you
press Up on the TV. It gives an accurate weather report on how it will be
on the next day (not today).

The different weathers :
-Good weather
	The good weather is the normal one, there is nothign special going
	on, and depending on the season it's worded differently. Such as
	summer saying it will be a hot day. As such, there can be good 
	weather in every season.
-Rain
	Rain happens in Spring, Summer or Fall only. During Rain, various
	things are affected. 
	-You don't need to water your crops.
	-Animals left out might become sick (except Dog and Horse)
	-You get tired faster when using tools.
	-Alot of the villagers stay in their houses or meet elsewhere than
	 usual.
	-The confessional is always open on rainy days.
-Snow
	Snow has the same effects as Rain, except it happens only in winter.
	The difference is that you don't have any crops to water obviously.
-Hurricanes
	This happens only in summer, and causes major damage to your farm.
	Stones and branches are thrown randomly in your field, fences are
	destroyed, crops are ripped out, and animals that were left out
	are possibly gone forever. In fact, during Typhoons you cannot even
	get out of the house either, so your animals also will be angry for
	not being fed on that day.
-Snowstorm
	Similar to Hurriance, but happen only in winter. While it won't destroy
	your field, it will still keep you from going outside, animals might be
	lost if they were still outside, or will be angry or sick for being
	being fed for a day.
	
Important to note, any and all events and festivals will happen on sunny days.
The weather will never be bad on those days. Also has to be sunny on days that
Mayor Thomas, Barley or other people come to your door, except for Won.

There is an easy way of tricking the weather into your favor though. If you
get to bed before 12am, it will get randomly generated when you get up the
next morning. So if you save before going to bed, you might get different
results once you check the weather report on the next morning.

Remember that the weather report is for the day after. Thus like this :
Day 1 - Save your game, get o bed
Day 2 - Check weather report for Day 3 when you get up.
Day 3 - Target day of the trick

It's a good habit to check the weater every morning so you can avoid Hurricanes
and snowstorms. You can reload the previous night save and eventually the
weather report will show a different result. It might take a few reloads to
get the wanted weather. 

You can also trick the weather into the weather of your choice for various 
reasons. 

-You can force it  to rain/snow on the other days so you can use the 
 confessional, or to water your crops every day, reducing your work load.

-You can force it to be sunny so that your animals can stay outside without
 getting sick as well, or be able to train your dog at frisbee, among others.
 Of course you also want it to be sunny on days you actually work your tools 
 outside, like cleaning your field or wood chopping.

-You can force it to get a Hurricane if you absolutely want more stones in 
 your field, although I don't think the damage is worth it.

-You CANNOT force it to have any other weather than Sunny on certain days,
 which usually are festivals. Also, some days related to festivals might
 never get bad weather, like when Barley comes to get a Cow or Sheep for
 the Sheep/Cow Festivals. In fact, most people that comes to your door
 forces the weather to be good. Only Won, Zack and Gotz don't care about
 weather when they knock at your door, if not mistaken.

-Also, the weather doesn't seem to change if you went to bed after 
 midnight, possibly because the game already determined the next day's 
 weather with the date change.

============
Passing Time
============

Time is easy to control to some degree. Every second is one minute passing 
in game. Since the game only shows digits in 10s, you'll see the time change
every 10 seconds.

Time passes only when outside, that is on your field, in the village, at
the beach or mountains.

Time does not pass when you are inside. That includes any house in the village,
the houses at the beach, your house, the barn, coop, horse shed and the two 
mines. It also includes the extra houses you can get in the village, mountain 
and beach.

Time also does not pass during Festivals. The festivals require that you talk
to certain people to make it advance and eventually end.

There is one slight exception in the mines. Time only passes one minute every
time you use stairs, wether it's going up or down. So 10 floors will equal to
10 minutes in game.

All Festivals do not require you to be there at the very first hour of it 
starting. You can get there minutes before the end of it, and you will see
the event in full.

The hot spring in the mountain regains Fatigue and Stamina at a rate of 1 per
minute or so, so depending on your levels, 1 hour in the spring is 60
stamina/fatigue restored.

The bath in your house has the same effect, but use up 30 minutes when you 
use it, despite being inside of the house where time normally doesn't flow.
It restores for 30 minutes worth, the same as the hot springs.

Certain items, like the Goddess Jewel and Kappa Jewel, restore either Stamina
or Fatigue just by holding it, aka not in your rucksack but in your hands,
like if you wanted to use it as a tool. It restores at the same rate as the
hot springs, but you can still walk around while holding it.

Those jewels do not work where time doesn't flow, but it can restore 1 point
if held when you go down stairs in the mines, since time advances 1 minute
when you do.

============
Making Money
============
There's only two general ways of making money. There is a third unconventionnal 
way in the girl version only.

The first method is through shipping. Anything shippable will net you some 
money when Zack comes to pick it up at 5pm everyday. The Shipping Bins hold an 
unlimited amount of items, but you still need to find what to ship and how to 
get those items.

The second way is through ploughing in the mines. Digging around, you can find 
some money bags. You can also find these in your field randomly. They are only 
worth 10G each, but they are added to your cash right away. As you can guess, 
its not a very efficient way of making money.

The girl version as a third possible way, which is through Won. Won can buy 
things from you. He can buy just about any item in the game, and will offer a 
better price than Zack for most shippable items too, with some bargaining. You 
need to raise the friendship with him before he offers to buy things off your 
hands thought. This is an unconventional way to make money, but still worth to 
mention.
So obviously, you'll be mainly counting on your shipping items. But what can 
you ship?

Crops that you grow are an obvious choice, but require a few days to grow 
evidently. As seen in the charts previously, some crops are worth more than 
others. On the first year, you'll want to concentrate on making more income, 
and on the following years getting 100 shipped crops of each. After that its 
up to you.

Your animals products are also shippable. Milk, eggs and wool come in different 
qualities/quantities depending on the animal's affection, and if they won a 
contest, which then factors the total time spent outside as well.

When the barn and coop are upgraded, you can further increase the value of 
those items by buying the Makers from the blacksmith. He requires a few days 
and some Orihalcum to build one for you. Those will let you exchange the basic 
products for Cheese, Yarn and Mayonaise, of the same 'quality' as the 
milk/egg/wool used for it. For the same quality, the products spun through the 
makers are worth more money everyday.

There are herbs growing in the forest, mountain and beach. All colors are worth 
around 100G each, except the Black Herbs found in the mines, because they can 
be found in unlimited quantities in theory. The other colored herbs only grow 
once a day. Also, every season have different products that can be found in the 
forest, mountain, beach and behind Carter's church (fall and winter only) if 
you can get that door unlocked.

You can also fish using the rod. The higher the level of your rod, the bigger 
and better fishes its possible to fish. But since its random, you'll still get 
smaller ones of course. All fishes can be shipped, and also some of the special 
items found, like Fossils and Pirate Treasures, that are rare catches even with 
high level rods. In the girl version you can even keep fishes for later in that 
water hole near your shipping box.

The mines are also a way to get some shippable items. Every kind of ore and 
gems found in either mines can be shipped. Its a good idea to bring the basket 
with you when you go there. See the mining section to know where to find the 
gems and how much each is worth. You can also make jewels that fetch a nice sum 
from ores you get in the mine, explained in the mining section as well.

============
Mineral Town
============

Your obligated neighbor, your life on the farm is closely linked to this town. 
Befriending them is part of the life here, and one day getting married to one 
of them.

--Mayor Thomas--
Mayor of the town, he's also the one taking care of most festivals. He goes 
every sunday to share some pie with Ellen. He asks you to take care of the farm 
when you first arrive, and then he'll come over sometimes to tell you about the 
upcoming festivals.

--Zack--
The second person you'll meet when you arrive, and possibly the most important 
to some degree, Zack is the local postman. He takes care of the delivery of 
parcels and mail that arrives, and also comes everyday at 5pm to take what's in 
your shipping boxes. He gives you the money right away, you don't even need to 
be there to see him about getting paid, he's very thrustworthy. His house is on 
the beach.

--Won--
You'll eventually get him knocking at your door one morning to sell you apples 
or a vase for your house. He's a moneymaker, and seems to hide some not-so-nice 
attitude behind his merchandizing schemes. In the boy version he's mostly there 
to sell you some extra seeds and flower seeds. 

In the girl version befriending him will eventually allow you to sell him 
items, or even play a mini-game that has chances of earning lots of money too. 
He lives with Zack at the beach. Its possible to marry him too in the girl 
version.

--Ellen--
The eldest in town. She apparently lost the use of her legs, and spends her 
days rocking her chair and telling stories to Stu her grandchild. She's the one 
you want to befriend if you wish to earn a stocking for christmas. When the 
friendship is high enough, she will take a yarn you offer her and turn it into 
a sock.

--Barley--
Another town elder, he will come early in the first year to ask you to take 
care of a horse for him. He's also the one taking care of the Farm where you 
can buy some Cows and Sheeps. He'll have them delivered to you in the same 
day, straight in the barn when you do.

--Carter--
The town's priest, takes care of the church. Every Monday and Wednesday 
(and rainy days), he'll be in the confessional, which allows you to uncursed a 
tool, or confess your sins to the goddess, hoping for forgiveness. Not being 
forgiven doesn't have bad consequences thought, but being forgiven has good 
results. Every other day he's tutoring Stu and May in front of the church. He 
also seems to have a hidden mushroom garden behind the church.

--Karen, Jeff and Sasha--
The owners of the supermarket. Jeff seems to be kind, but easily taken 
advantage of. Try to be nice to him okay? Customers tend to take credit from 
him, but you can't get any credit with him, don't try. Sasha takes care of 
collecting the debts apparently, or else goes to the town square to chat with 
the town's wives. Karen is their daughter. She doesn't like sweets, and often 
hangs with Rick, usually in front of the shop in the morning. She's also 
sometimes at the goddess pond. She's one elligible girl to marry in the boy 
version.

--Duke and Manna--
Duke is the owner of the winery. They have a daughter Aja who apparently left 
town suddenly. Duke keeps drinking his own wine alot and calling Aja long 
distance, which doesn't please Manna much. Manna on the other hand is the 
biggest chatter box in town. Don't tell her any secrets less the whole town 
will know on the next day.

--Rick, Popuri and Lillah--
The caretakes of the Chicken farm, its where you'll go to buy your chicken and 
feed. Rick and Popuri are two elligible bachelors, depending on the version you 
play. Lillah takes care of the shop, but has a poor health. Her husband left to 
find a cure, but hasn't returned yet. Popuri is often by the goddess pond, 
helping in the shop, or else at the church. Rick is often hanging around Karen.

--Stu and May--
The only kids and town, often playing together, but usually hanging with Carter 
in front of the church, perhaps for a bit of teaching of the Goddess' ways.

--Doug and Ann--
Doug is the tennant of the bar, also where you'll find the town's only phone, 
if you want to buy things off the TV Shopping Network. He's open everyday for 
most of the day. Its also the town's hotel, and a few people sleep there 
everynight. Ann is one elligible bachelor, and works at the bar most of the 
time. She's sometimes at the Goddess pond with Popuri too.

--Saibara and Gray--
Saibara is the town's blacksmith. When you need to upgrade tools, its where 
you'll want to go. His apprentice is Gray, and he doesn't seem quite pleased 
with all the work Saibara puts him through. He's one of your potential husband 
in the girl version. Gray lives in the inn, in the same room as Cliff too.

--Mary, Basil and Maria--
Mary is one of the girls you can marry as well, she's a bookworm honestly. She 
opened a library so she could lend the books that her father Basil has written 
with his many travels. Basil is seen going around town looking for herbs and 
new things, often in the mountains. He looks pretty much like a traveler. Mary 
and her mom are seen going shopping together every few days too.

--Elli and Doctor--
Don't they look cute together? Well actually either can be married, depending 
on the version you play of course. Elli is helping Doctor with his clinic by 
selling the medecines. Doctor can be consulted if you need a checkup. He's also 
the one that picks you up if you faint out by overworking yourself.

--Gotz and Harris--
The town's carpenter, he lives alone in the woods, but is visited everyday by 
Harris the town's police officer. Gotz is either at his home, ready to take 
orders to enhance your house, or walking the forest and mountain looking for 
more wood to cut.

--Kai--
Kai, while being an elligible bachelor for the girl version, is possibly one of 
the hardest to marry. He comes to town only once a year, and opens the beach 
restaurant for the season. Its a nice place that alot of people visit, 
including the sprites sometimes. Popuri seems to have a fondness for him.

--Cliff--
He apparently left his mom and sister to wander the world, and ended up here. 
You'll find him at the church everyday, he's friends with Carter, and he sleeps 
at the Inn at night. By Fall in the first year he'll start to run out of money 
to live here, and if you don't offer him to help at the Winery when you are 
asked to, he'll be leaving town by Winter time. You can marry him in the girl 
version.

--Harvest Sprites--
Their house is right on the path next to the church. A small house, 7 sprites 
are there. Befriending them will allow you to hire them for a few days at a 
time, so they can work on watering your crops, harvesting them, or take care 
of your animals. Sprites also can send you an invitation for a Tea Party in 
spring.

--Harvest Goddess--
It seems sometimes like you're the only know that sees her around the place. 
She appears in the Goddess Pond if you throw something in it, allowing you to 
connect with the GameCube A Wonderful Life game, to trade some data and unlock 
some items. You don't need to connect to play, but its bonus things you can't 
find otherwise. She also offers you a game on the TV from Spring 1st to 5th. 
She will also randomly appear to congratulate you on certain milestones 
throughout the game.

Its possible to marry her too, given some conditions, in the boy version.

--Kappa--
I'm not sure how I can describe him at all. This green creature seems to be the 
alter ego of the Goddess. Living in the mountain lake, tossing him some 
cucumbers for 10 days will eventually reward you with something. I think 
that's the only use he has at all. You can marry him with the same conditions 
as the Goddess in the girl version.

--Gourmet Chef--
Only seen once a year at the Cooking Festival, he's the judge of the contest. 
Its possible to marry him in the girl version too, but not sure why you'd want 
to. I guess you need to have done every recipe to marry him.

===============
Harvest Sprites
===============
The Sprites are your biggest asset and help in this game. They can make an 
otherwise impossible chore into a profitable cause. Befriending them is an 
important part of making lots of money in this game.

Befriending them is relatively easy. They particularly like herbs of their own 
color. You can also buy the 50G a piece Flour and give some to them, they love 
that.

Boosting their affection very quickly requires giving them gifts on their 
birthdays, it helps enormously.

Bold (Purple)  : Spring 4th
Staid (Blue)   : Spring 15th
Aqua (Indigo)  : Spring 26th
Timid (Green)  : Summer 16th
Hoggy (Yellow) : Fall 10th
Chef (Red)     : Fall 14th
Nappy (Orange) : Winter 22th

On these days, try to concentrate your gifts on that sprite to make their 
affections very high quickly. 

Sprites love herbs of their own color best, but they also like flour, which 
can be found very easily at the shop, and its pretty cheap.

In Spring, you'll mostly find Blue herbs in the forest, and Orange and Yellow 
herbs at the beach.
In Summer, Red Herbs and Blue Herbs in the forest/mountain, and some Purple 
Herbs at the beach.
In Fall, Red and Green Herbs in the mountain, and Indigo herbs at the beach.
In Winter, there's only 2 White herbs. One in the forest, and one behind the 
church.

When they reach at least 3 hearts, you can do two things with them :

-Hire them to work on the farm
-Play mini-games with them

Playing Mini-Games don't have any rewards, but it will increase that sprite's 
ability to the given task. Think of it as training the sprite. The better they 
are at a task, the faster they do the work.

Making them work also increase their ability, so eventually they will get 
better at it. Its a good idea to ask them to do always the same task until they 
are highly skilled at it. That way you'll have sprites for specific tasks.

When you hire a sprite, you need to tell them which work they will do : Water, 
Harvest or Animals, and for how long : 1, 3 or 7 days. When you hire them, they 
will start working on the next day. And when they are done, you can't rehire 
them right away, so there will always be a day that they won't work for you, 
their day off if you want. You can rehire them, but they will start the day 
after of course. You'll need to plan to hire another sprite for that day 
instead, so there's always a sprite doing the requested work.

Water will have them water your crops for you everyday. Two sprites can cover 
my 12x24 garden easily even at no watering skill. This skill will probably 
increase quickly if you keep hireing the same sprites. More skill translates as 
moving faster on the field and watering them faster.

Harvest is not needed everyday, so it won't skill up as fast. When the crops 
are ready, the sprites will pluck them out for you and put them in the shipping 
box automatically. More skill means moving faster to pluck the crops out. 
Usually a single sprite should be enough unless all of your crops are ready at 
the same time.

Animals is taking care of the chickens, cows and sheeps, wether they are 
outside or not. They do the action of brushing and milking/clipping them for 
you, and if they are inside they will also add the feed to each stall as 
needed. For chickens they will gather the eggs and add the feed if they are 
inside.

You might want to take care of your animals yourself because Sprites never use 
the makers to increase the value of the items produced. They will never ship 
cheese, they will automatically ship the milk instead. One sprite should be 
enough to take care of all of your animals, no matter how many you have.

Use the Crops Calendars I provided so you can plan on hireing the sprites to 
harvest on the right days.

Also, you can talk to a sprite while he's working on your field. He'll give you 
a choice. "See you tomorrow" means you still need his services. "You're Done" 
means that you've 'fired' the sprite, and he won't return on the next day. 
Sometimes you might purposely fire a sprite because you won't need him on that 
day, so you can rehire him for the next day.

Examples, if its going to rain on the next day, fire your watering sprites, and 
while its raining to hire them back for watering on the next. If you're not 
expecting any harvests on a day, you can fire them so you can rehire them for 
the next harvest.

This gives you some control so you don't miss a day of harvest/watering due to 
their work schedule being over. They don't give you the option to stay or fire 
them if its on their last day.

If you don't want to miss a day of work, and that you have enough sprites 
willing to work for you, check your Earning screen for how many days are left. 
When you see "1D", go see the sprites and hire new ones to replace the ones 
finishing.

Lastly, the sprites are open even on festivals and holidays, unlike shops. But 
they are open only from 9am to 7pm.

=============
Wedding Blues
=============
You can marry, but not before certain conditions are respected. You need to 
raise your affection with your prospect by giving him/her gifts often. The 
small beating heart's color will gauge how far along you are. You also need to 
trigger their heart events to progress toward the wedding. Some events will 
also give you unique gifts.

On the other hand, if you don't make the right moves, and see most of the Rival 
Hearts events, you might see that boy/girl marry off to someone else. Here are 
the pairings :

-Rick and Karen
-Kai and Popuri
-Gray and Mary
-Cliff and Ann
-Doctor and Elli

Watching their heart events (Rival heart events) will help them along getting 
wed. But once you've married your choice, you should trigger those events so 
everyone can marry and be happy. Certain events are only triggered when some 
couples are made.

If you can't manage to woo anyone before they all are married, you can always 
marry the Goddess for the boy version, or Won, Kappa or Gourmet Chef in the 
girl version, so not all is lost, but they arguably require more work.

=============
Useful Tricks
=============
-The Save/Reload trick explained in the mining section can be used in many 
places in the game. It allows you to retry until you get the best results. Only 
a few events can't be changed through reloading.

-Forcing the weather is a good way to ease your workload by forcing it to rain
so you don't have to water your plants. At least until you have sprites high
enough to take care of it, or a good enough watering can to make it faster.

-Forcing the weather can allow you to keep animals outside. Animals increase
the quality of their products if they spent at least 25 days (600 total hours)
outside. Those do not need to be consecutive hours.

-Forcing the weather to rain can also benefit you by using the confessional.
The confessional only opens between 1pm and 4pm on Monday and Wednesday, but
also on any rainy day. 

-You can only use the confessional once a day for forgiveness, but you can
use it several times for cursed tools.

-Save before using the confessional, and reload until you get a 'goddess 
has forgiven you' reply. Every time you use it, it can offer 1 of 3 different
combinations of things to ask forgiveness for :
 -Littering or being mean to villages : Friendship boost with everyone
 -Overworking sprites : Friendship boost with sprites
 -Not caring for animals : Affection boost for all farm animals, horse and dog.
 -Not enough sleep : Slight Fatigue/Stamina boost
 -Marrying the goddess/kappa : Only useful if you've met the requirements.

-Using the confessional to increase animal affection helps with getting better
products from them, which in turn increase your money making.

-On the other hand, if you want to train your dog to the disk throw, make sure 
its sunny everyday. The Dog's ability to catch the disk apparently rises 
depending on the total distance he 'catches'. A miss doesn't count toward 
increasing this, so save and make sure you get good distances on all throws. A 
little distance is better than none at all, for the little amount of throws 
you're allowed per day.

-When its raining or snowing your stamina depletes quicker while outside (when 
you use tools), but not while inside or in the mine, so when it rains stay out 
of the rain to work.

-Even without tricking the weather, save before bed and after waking up if 
you can use the two slots. Sometimes you'll realize the next morning that you 
forgot to feed the animals, or that you should really have taken care of that 
fence before sleeping.

-If you're using only one save slot, save every morning, just in case you do a 
mistake during the day, like forgetting your basket inside the Blacksmith when 
reforging a tool. Your basket is effectively 'locked in' for a few days when 
that happens.

-Rocks can replace fence, but sometimes you'll find an animal escaped. Just 
bring it back inside the rocked area. You can also use plain branches as fence, 
like rocks. You can find a few branches every day in the woods, so you can 
always get some. Neither rocks or branches will decay.

-Some Festivals can be affected by a save/reload. The Horse Race mostly has the 
same winners all the time, and each time you reload the odds change. So you can 
reload until you see that the winning horse has a x7 to x15 winning ratio, or 
you can take your chance and reload if you don't take the right one. Sometimes 
a horse with lesser odds will snatch the title, it can happen.

-The Chicken Festival can be won with a chicken of 0 hearts. In fact, you might 
want to offer your younguest chicken to this competition, even with no hearts, 
because they will live the longest. The competition itself is a bit wonky 
thought, and your chicken acts weirdly when the affection rate is low. But keep 
reloading until you nail the title.

-Cow and Sheep festival's results depend solely on your affection rate to that 
cow/sheep. The results are not quite random because of that, and can vary only 
slightly if you reload. But to effectively see ANY difference at all, you need 
to reload the day before you give the cow/sheep to Barley, thus not very 
convenient. Since they live longer than chickens, this time you should give it 
one with very high affection (8+ hearts) if you can.

-Fishing at a festival and you don't want to litter? People in the village 
start to dislike you when you do, your rucksack is limited in space and you 
don't have a garbage can nearby. There's a very easy trick to get around this. 
Go in your rucksack and manually toss them out pressing the start button. The 
item is effectively discarded, but it doesn't count as littering! If you're 
aiming for a full basket of pirate treasures, go ahead and take your time!

-Affection/Friendship levels for the people in town are a bit different than 
your animals. To increase frienship/affection, you need to give them gifts. 
Their reaction usually will tell you what they like. There's also an 
incredibly detailed FAQ on this linked later on.

-The main rule with anyone, including sprites, seems to be that the first gift 
you give are worth more affection points than the rest. So you want to give 
them as a first gift A- Something they Like/Love, B- Have it wrapped before 
hand if you can, and C- On their birthdays preferably. That's the biggest 
affection boost you can get in a day with a single gift. Wrapping increases 
the point value of the items, and on their birthday its increased as well. The 
other way around is true as well. If you give Hated items, they will decrease 
alot faster with wrapped/birthdays.

-All of the citizens will increase their affection if you give them more than 
one gift a day, except for the bachelors. Giving them more than one gift a 
day doesn't increase them faster, so make that single gift count! Wrap it up! 
So in short, the first gift you give to anyone should always be wrapped to 
increase their affection faster.

=========
Festivals
=========
Festivals are interesting events that sometimes give you gifts and prizes as a 
result. Its also a nice break from the routine work on the farm. The festivals 
are at set dates every season and year.

When a time frame is given, as soon as you enter the area in that time, the 
event starts. When finished you are sent back home. In some events it will be 
6pm, in others it will be next morning automatically.

You can get to the event area minutes before the closing time, and you won't 
miss it, so you can do what you need first.

Most of the events that requires you to get to the Rose Square, Beach or 
Mountain Top are also unlimited energy events. You can use that fact to 
uncursed some tools, or fish a full basket. Time doesn't pass while in the 
festival either.

New Year Festival
 Spring 1st, Rose Square, 6pm to Midnight
 Saibara, Thomas, Duke, Manna, Ann, Elli, Doug, Stu, May, Zack, Gotz, Carter
 Description : Celebrating the new year with citizens of the town.
 Tips : Keep your rucksack empty, and you'll be gifted to a full pack of 
        Rice Cakes to celeberate the new year. They make good gifts too.

Spring Thanksgiving
 Spring 14th, various
 Description : Playing the boy version, you have to take cookies and offer 
               them to the girl you prefer. You can only give one cookie per 
               bachelor thought. This gives an affection boost to them. This 
               is the equivalent of the White Day in japan, which the guy 
               answers the girl's affection that she showed by offering 
               chocolates on Valentines Day. Playing the girl version, 
               you'll be offered cookies by high affections guys. They will 
               come to your house every 2 hours game time (8am, 10am...)

Spring Horse Race
 Spring 18th, Rose Square, 10am to 6pm
 Description : Horse racing at the square, bet on horses for medals which can 
               be exchanged for gifts. If your horse is mature, you can race 
               yourself.
 Ann, Karen, Rick, Popuri, Sasha, Jeff, Manna, Saibara, May, Barley, Thomas, 
 Zack, Harris, Duke, Doug
 Tips : Use the reload trick to bet only on high payout horses. If you can 
        race, bet on yourself for a high payout. It might need a few races to 
        get the hang of winning thought. Winning the race also gives you a 
        Power Berry the first time. If your horse isn't old enough, you'll be 
        limited to betting.
 Bring your empty basket, and you can fill it with Broaches. 540 medals will 
 fill the basket of broaches, and sell for a total of 60000G, making it a great 
 money maker early on. You can carry a few more in your hands.
 You can buy a Jewel of Truth for 1000 medals, but don't if you didn't get 
 your shelves yet. You won't be able to store it anywhere else. There's also a 
 Power Berry for 900 medals.

Cooking Contest
 Spring 22nd, Rose Square, 10am to Noon, 4pm to 6pm
 Karen, Manna, Sasha, Doctor, Lillia, Rick, Gotz, Zack, Ann, Doug, Carter, 
 Gourmet, Thomas
 Description : Gourmet will give you a category of food to prepare. Then you 
               have the rest of the day to ready it, and then bring it back to 
               the square for its judging.
 Tips : You can't participate until you get your kitchen in the second house 
        expansion. Well you can, but you won't get good results even if you 
        could find something that fits the category. You need to go to the 
        square between 10am and Noon to talk to Gourmet and get the category of 
        food to prepare, then you go back home to cook it, and finally go back 
        to the square with your dish to tel Thomas you're ready. If you're not 
        the winner, its usually a random one chosen among Doug, Ann, Lillia and 
        Manna. No Karen's black stuff will never win.

Summer Festival
 Summer 1st, Beach, 10am to 6pm
 Popuri, Kai, Doug, Sasha, Thomas, Zack
 Description : Come and enjoy the opening of the beach with everyone.
 Tips : Bring your basket. You have unlimited energy, so you can fish to fill 
        it up for extra money. If you have a mature dog, enter the Dog Disk 
        competition for a Power Berry as a prize. Save beforehand and try until 
        you manage a perfect shot for the prize. You can fish after you've made 
        sure you won the competition too, so you won't have to fish all over 
        again.

Chicken Sumo Festival
 Summer 7th, Rose Square, 10am to 6pm
 Popuri, Barkley, Rick, Saibara, Doug, Duke, Thomas 
 Description : An amusing competition where Chickens try to intimidate each 
               other off the ring.
 Tips : You can win even with a chicken of 0 hearts. Try to enter your 
        younguest chicken so that it will give you good eggs for the longest 
        time afterwards. Save before entering the square. The game mechanics 
        are a bit wonky, but keep trying until you win. Winning gets them to 
        produce G-P-X brand of eggs when they reach the 'L' stage of eggs.
 
Cow Festival
 Summer 20th, Rose Square, 10am to 6pm
 Description : The Cow version of the Chicken Sumo, but there's no fighting at 
               least, just judging.
 Tips : Nothing to do much here, just enter the cow with the highest affection 
        and it might win. Winning earns it to produce higher quality milk, same 
        way than eggs do.

Fireworks Festival
 Summer 24th, Beach, 6pm to midnight
 Cliff, Elli, Ann, Kai, Doctor, Mary, Gray, Karen, Rick, Popuri
 Description : Everyone gathers at the Beach to watch fireworks near the end of 
               summer.
 Tips : Unlimited energy + beach + basket = lots of fishes once again. Fish 
        before starting the fireworks. Talk to Rick to start the event. If you 
        have at least one bachelor to Green Heart level, you can ask to watch 
        the fireworks together instead of Rick. You'll wake up the next morning.

Music Festival
 Fall 3rd, Church, 6pm to midnight
 Jeff, Sasha, Karen, Mary, May, Stu, Ellen, Ann
 Description : Nothing too special here, just get to the church to have you 
               playing music while Karen sings. Only Popuri doesn't 
               participate, for some reason.

Harvest Festival
 Fall 9th, Rose Square, 10am to 6pm
 Sasha, Manna, Anna, Doug, Karen, Mary, Ann, Gotz, Carter, Elli, Thomas
 Description : Come and add your food to the stew!
 Tips : Nothing special, just bring anything edible with you, or bring a 
        poisonnous mushroom for funny results as everyone gets sick. As if 
        Karen was helping any with this.

Fall Horse Race
 Rose Square, 10am to 6pm
 Description : Even more Horse Racing before the winter!
 Tips : Same as the Spring event, same prizes too. You'll get a Power Berry if 
        you race and haven't won it in Spring already.

Sheep Festival
 Rose Square, 10am to 6pm
 Description : Show off your sheep with the best wool.
 Tips : The Sheep version of the Cow Festival, but you need to remember that 
        you can't enter a sheep that doesn't have its wool on, so don't go and  
        clip it off for a week before the event. You can't affect the judging 
        other than offering your best sheep. Winning earns you better quality 
        wool in the same way eggs and milk do.

Pumpkin Festival
 Fall 31st, your farm, every 2 hours
 Description : Haloween, without the costumes.
 Tips : Buy 3 chocolates before this day. Every 2 hours of the morning, the 
        kids will come. Stu, May... and Popuri that seems to find it unfair 
        that only kids get some sugary treats. Indulge her and give her some 
        too.

Winter Thanksgiving
 Winter 14th, Various
 Descrption : Valentines's day if you prefer. As per Japan tradition, the 
              girls offer the boy they like chocolates. On White Day the boy 
              answers with something if they accept. Its a sort of proposition 
              day to date later on. Playing the boy version, you will get 
              the visit of high affection girls every 2 hours. Playing the boy 
              version you need to go give the chocolates to the girls in town.

Stocking Festival
 Winter 25, going to bed after 9pm
 Description : On the night of the 25th, if you have a stocking, Mayor Thomas 
               will come while you sleep and put a random item in your sock as 
               a gift. Santa Thomas?

Noodles Festival
 Winter 30
 Rose Square, 6pm to Midnight
 Thomas, Manna, Duke, Jeff, Sasha, Ann, Gotz, Carter
 Description : One of the two End of Year festival. This one has everyone throw 
               in a noodle banquet.
 Tips : Bring an empty rucksack for your fill of buckweath flour.

StarGazing Festival
 Winter 30
 Mother Hill top, 6pm to Midnight 
 Description : The other end of year celebration, come and watch the last 
               sunset of the year.

=============
Special Items
=============
Some items need a bit more work, but are useful as well to gather in due time :

Power Berries : They increase your stamina, so you can use your tools for a 
                longer time. There are 10 to be found :
  -Randomly in your field, dig it out with the Hoe.
  -Giving Flowers or Crops to the Goddess Pond for 10 days straight.
  -Buying it with Medals in the Horse Race festival.
  -Digging it in the Spring Mine 100th floor.
  -Digging it in the Lake Mine 19th floor.
  -Look BEHIND the entrance to the Lake Mine in winter.
  -Win the Dog Disk contest
  -Win a Horse Race with your own horse
  -Fish it out of the beach in Winter with a Mystrile Rod or better.
  -Buy it on the TV Shopping Network once you bought everything else possible.

A Blue Power Berry that increase your Fatigue maximum can be obtained by 
offering a cucumber to the Mountain Lake for 10 days.

Jewels of Truth : Nine of them scattered, finding the 9th will allow you to see 
your Stamina and Fatigue levels in numbers.
  -Bought from Won for 50000G.
  -Bought with 1000 medals at the Horse Races..
  -Found on your Dog House.
  -Found in the Horse's water.
  -Found between the pages of a book on the second floor of the library.
  -Found by examining the first lamppost south of the church.
  -Found on the calendar of the Vacation House you buy from Gotz.
  -Given by Thomas after 50 years of marriage (!!).
  -Found in Thomas' refridgerator once you have all 8 others.

=======================
Walkthough Introduction
=======================
Here's a detailed walkthrough about playing the game. This will mostly detail 
the first year of playing, since its where you will probably get the most done. 
The other years are keeping the good work and getting a few things more done. 
Alot of things can't be done before year two either, but by then you should be 
in a good position to work it out on your own.

=================
Spring First Year
=================

The first season of the game. You can't expect to do much. In fact, I feel this 
is the place of the game to do all you can in preparation for the next season. 
There are only a few ways to make money, and you probably won't get out of the 
season extremely rich, but enough to take care of your crops and animals for 
the rest of the year. That's the basic idea of the first year in all, getting 
settled in and learning of the system. There is very little permanent damage 
you could do in Spring, so take the time to get things done now and be ready 
for later.

In this season, you can plant Turnips, Potatoes, Cucumbers and Cabbages, 
althought you might not grow cabbages on the first year, since you need to buy 
them from Won instead, which isn't even in town as you start. If you do, 
consider the day you've planted it to count how long it will be until the 
harvest.

Your tools are at low level, and you have no sprites to help you at first, so 
you'll have to plan accordingly. For crops use 8 or 7 tiles formations so you 
can water them all on your own.

Start giving gifts to sprites too. They like herbs found in the mountain area 
and beach, especially herbs of their color. There are blue herbs in the forest, 
and the beach has some Orange and Yellow herbs. You won't need their help on 
this season, but pumping their friendship will help you in the long run.

--Spring 1--
On the first day you unfortunatly can't do a thing. Althought in the MFoMT 
version you can actually get the 'bad ending' by saying you don't want the 
farm, but what fun would that be hm? So just accept the work, lazy bones.

--Spring 2 to 5--
Now the real work can start. On the first day, look outside your door and the 
Mayor and Zack will introduce themselves to you, and explain a bit of the 
controls and system. Won will appear during those 4 days as soon as you get 
out of your house, possibly twice. Once to introduce himself, and once to sell 
you an apple. 

If you have the money and playing MFoMT, just buy it and give it back to him at 
the beach house. Won is fond of things that are more or less rare, so his own 
apples are considered as rare. Go figure. You don't really need to befriend him 
in FoMT, so don't buy what he tries to sell you if you value your money. Not 
yet at least.

So every morning start by peeking outside. There will be one day, as long as it 
doesn't rain, where Barley will come and ask you to take care of a horse. If 
you don't see those events on the first 4 days or work, you will in the next 
days soon enough. Make sure its sunny if you want to see them. They don't come 
to your house on rainy days, so you might want to use the Weather Trick for 
this.

Remember to buy a brush at the blacksmith's place for 800G as soon as you can, 
so you can brush your horse everyday and talk to it to raise its affection 
toward you faster. If you don't take good care of it, Barley will take it away 
from you next year. You can only really talk and brush it, no need to feed it. 

Also take care of your dog by lifting it up and down once a day, that raises 
its affection as well. You can leave it out, but if its going to rain, get him 
back inside the house before bed.

Once you made sure that there's nothing more out your door, get back inside, go 
in front of the TV and SAVE. Turn on the TV and check on the LEFT channel. 
There will be two outcomes : the New Year Special show, or the Harvest Goddess 
game. The New Year event is nothing at all, so just keep pressing right until 
you see the Goddess appear. 

The Goddess will give you a guessing game. She gives you a number and then asks 
you if the next will be higher or lower. Numbers are 0 to 9, 0 being lowest. 
Its safe to think that betting High on 0-4 and Low on 5-9, but this game is 
frustrating on the statistical chances. I've often lost while betting Higher 
on a 1. 

Try to win between 10 and 14 times in a row to get some Relaxation Tea Leaves. 
They are worth 1000 each. Play it once at a time, and reload your game if you 
don't get the leaves. That's why I told you to save twice, because you'll be 
reloading often, and sometimes you'll save after losing. You can use the second 
save to fix your mistake.

Win 3 Relaxation Tea Leaves, drop them in your shipping bin, and go back in 
for more. You can only play the game 5 times, counting the ones you lose. If 
you mistakingly pressed LEFT on the Goddess when trying to catch her show, 
don't worry, it doesn't count as a try until you see the first number appear. 
You'll get 5000G a day using this method, which means 20000G for the first 4 
days. And you didn't even start to work on the farm.

Once the goddess game is done for the day, you'll want to start doing other 
things. The first thing you should do is grab the Honey in the tree south of 
your house, and offer it to Gotz. He walks out of his house exactly at 7am, so 
you can catch him there. Else he's back at his house around 11am if you prefer. 
Do that everyday until he gives you a recipe.

You can write the recipe down if you want, because the game doesn't remember 
it for you unless you cook it yourself. And since you're not about to start 
cooking anyway, you can't use it.

While you're near his cabin, get some flowers, and go uphill to throw them in 
the Goddess Pond, the one by the hot baths. You'll have to do this 10 days in 
a row. On the eleventh day she will give you a Power Berry, to extend your 
Stamina/Energy. That wasn't too hard was it?

Then move north to the uppermost section of town. The house on the left of the 
bench is the General Store, go inside and buy some seeds. You only start with 
500G, so pick what you think is better. Go with Turnips. Turnips grow fast, 
but you'll need to buy more seeds everytime. Cucumbers aren't worth as much 
money, but regrow on their own if you're picky about it. You should prioritize 
money making at this point.

Get back to your farm, and use what energy you have to start cleaning your 
field. You can't do anything about the big rocks and tree stumps, so don't 
worry about those. If you can, clear a bit of space near the shipping bin in 
the upper left corner, and tile some 3x3 areas to plant the seeds you bought. 
Lay it out as explained in the Crops Basic section.

The position of the blocks doesn't matter, as long you have space to run 
around them and water all of them. Since there are a few obstacles that you 
can't get rid of yet, try to find some space that will allow you to move to 
every crop, or use a different shape that will allow you to.

Plant, water them, and use your axe/hammer/scythe to clear your field. You 
could always just pick and throw bushes, but I suggest the scythe so you can 
train it and upgrade it later. You don't need to do your whole field in a day 
either. If you have time left, go in the hot baths for an hour, and clean some 
more. 

Don't go beyond the final 'hold head and shaking' stage of energy, the one 
right before you turn blue. When you're too close to blue, you usually 
oversleep on the next day, and I've overslept even going to bed before 8pm 
when blue. Even spending 30m in the hot bath can save you from losing 2+ hours 
in the morning.

As soon as you get your first pay from your Tea Leaves (5000G, woohoo), go 
back on the shop after your daily offering and buy the RuckSack on sale for 
3000. Now you can carry twice as many items and tools. You won't be able on 
the Day 3 because the shop will be closed, so you will have at least 10000G by 
Day 4, so buy the Basket while at it, for 5000G. You will be using the Basket 
often, as it can contain 30 items for shipping, but you can't 'take' things 
out from it. So when put in, its going to be shipped.

If you got extra, buy a chicken at the Farm (the first on the left north from 
your far or the woods trail near Gotz's house). Its only 1500G. Use some of 
your leftover money to buy some feed, its only 10G each. You're still getting 
5000G a day, so don't worry about money too much yet. Buy more seeds, since 
you have more money, and keep 4-6 tiles of turnips/cucumbers. We just need to 
keep a steady flow of income for now.

If after doing your harvesting and watering you have too much time left, how 
about mining? This will probably be the only thing to do if it rains on these 
days, since you'll have alot less energy to work on cleaning the field anyway. 
With an upgraded rucksack and basket it will be easier. Bring it to the mine, 
along with a hammer and pickaxe.

Check in the Mining Section for either method of saving. It will make it easier 
and more profitable to save your energy.

Your goal this early in the season is level 10. Every 5 floors is a nice big 
area with lots of space to walk around. You could aim for level 100, where you 
can dig out a Power Berry from the ground, if you want, but its still early in 
the game for that. You'll have occasions into digging your way to the very 
lower levels for other reasons later too.

At level 3 you start finding gold ores. From level 5 mystrile ore, and at level
10 you start finding Orihalcum and Adamantite. Those are the best money makers 
you can find here. Level 10 isn't very long or hard to get to. Break rocks, put 
every Adamantite and Orihalcum ore you find, and keep the Mystrile in your bag. 

A full basket of Adamantite and Orihalcum is worth 1500G. If you feel you're 
using too much energy finding the good ones and don't fill your basket enough, 
put Mystrile in the basket as well, and keep Gold Ores in your rucksack. Lower 
Value is better than nothing at all.

When you run out of energy, go out, dump the basket in your shipping bin, and 
go back to the hot baths to get your energy back. You can do it again if you 
have time. 1500G isn't amazing, but in 4 days that means 6000G more, if you do 
it only once a day. A trip to level 10 only takes 10 minutes of game time. Its 
extra money, trust me you'll like having more of this in the start of the game.

One way to make some good profit is keeping the Orihacum in your rucksack and 
going to forge them into broaches by Saibara. It costs you 1000g to do it, but 
they sell for 2000G. Even if you have only two slots in your rucksack, that's 
still 2000G profit per trip. Just beware of the closing times.

Remember to check on Carter on Monday, Wednesday and rainy days. If you don't 
have animals, ask him to forgive you about the town people or about littering 
the road. It will increase everyone's friendship toward you. You could also 
ask to forgive about the Sprites, that's pretty useful but not necessary this 
early. If you have animals, you might want to increase their affection instead.

Something else you might receive during Spring is in your mail, an invitation 
to a tea party from the sprites. Try to go on a rainy day (and a day without 
harvest if you can), and if you hired any sprites somehow, make them go back 
home for the next day. Then you can go and present your invitation to one of 
the sprites before 5pm for the party itself, and you'll get some Relaxation 
Tea Leaves as a gift too!

On the fourth, its the birthday of Bold, the purple sprite. If you have some 
time, take all of the herbs in the forest, mountain and beach, and give them 
all to him to boost his affection. If you have some extra money, but don't 
spend too much, buy some flour and give it to him as well. It doesn't take 
alot of gifts to max him in fact. Early start on the sprites. 

You don't really need their help yet, but you can start asking them to water 
your field for some training if you want. The more they work, the faster they 
will be, so they will cover more ground eventually.

--Spring 6 to 10--
You can't play the Goddess game anymore, you'll have to rely on mining and 
harvesting. You can pick the bamboo shoots on the west side of the mountain as 
well for some extra money. Just try to keep some steady income. You'll see Won 
or Barley with the horse if you didn't get them yet, as long as its not 
raining.

If you did see Won twice and Barley, you could use the Weather Trick to make it 
rain, saving you the need to water the crops. But don't try to work in the 
rain, you run out of energy much quicker. Just go mine, keep the offerings to 
the goddess everyday, and take care of your chicken if any.

If you have a chicken, as soon as you can, put an egg in the incubator. You'll 
have another chicken for the price of a single egg. While there's an egg there, 
just bring the other eggs to the hot baths, and throw them in from the top 
opening. You'll get a spa-boiled egg, which sells for 80G instead of 50G for 
regular eggs.

I suggest that you keep mining to get some money almost everyday at this 
point. You'll want some extra for the upcoming holiday. You should get a 
harvest of turnips during that period, so remember to buy some seeds to 
replace them. 

On Saturdays, check the TV Shopping Channel for things to buy. Its either a 
mirror for 1000G or 2000G for a clock. They aren't very useful, but you'll 
need to buy nearly everything later to marry, so you can start now if you have 
a bit of spare money, which you should have anyway. Oh, to actually buy them, 
go to the tavern and use their phone.

If the weather is good, spend some time cleaning more of your garden everyday 
before bedtime. You'll want to have it rid of most of the herbs, and all rocks 
and branches. The bigger pieces will come soon. Don't work in the rain because 
your stamina depletes quicker.

Also keep giving honey to Gotz, he should reward you with a recipe soon. After 
that you can skip giving him some everyday, only ever so often to keep his 
friendship up. If its down, he won't want to work on your house later.

--Spring 11--
Day 11, that means its been a week since you've bought your rucksack. Well one 
week later, there's an even bigger on sale for 5000G! You should still have 
some from the Relaxation Tea Leaves and the money you've been mining for in the 
last days. Now we're getting to business. Spend the rest of the day as you 
will, mining or whatever. You should give the offering to the goddess before 
that, and take care of your crops and chickens first, so after buying it 
you're mostly free.

--Spring 12 to 17--
Now you'll start getting into a routine. After taking care of your crops, 
watering, and of your chickens, you should start the day by doing a round of 
gifts. Today should be the last day you need to offer flowers to the goddess, 
rewarding you with the Power Berry. Take the 3 blue grass in the forest area 
and near the hot baths, and the two sets of flower. Bring it any spa-boiled 
egg with you as well, for gifts. You'll do rounds first to Ellen, which is the 
top most row in the village, third door from the left. Granny likes eggs and 
flowers, so either will do.

Then move on to the church to give the eggs and flowers to Carter, the priest 
in the church. Eventually this will pay off. Then move by the beach, and take 
the 4 herbs that are there. Go back to the sprites. They like it if you give 
them herbs of their own color best. You should have Blue, Yellow and Orange 
with you, so hand them over to them first, at least one. You can hand the 
others to the rest as you wish.

The 15th is Staid's birthday this time. He likes Blue Herbs, but he even likes 
them more on his birthday, watch his friendship grow fast on this day, 
especially if you add a round of Flour to all of the herbs, even if not blue.

If you're playing the MFoMT version, the last one to befriend is Won, which is 
in Zack's beach house. When you go there the first time, Zack should hand you 
a fishing rod too. You'll get to work on that later, but the other tools are a 
bit more important at this stage. 

To befriend Won, go to the mine and go down to level 3 or better. Get him some 
Gold Ores. Those are pretty cheap to sell anyway, you're better with the 
50G-worth Adamantite and Orihalcum. If you go mine, just keep the Gold ones 
and sell the Mystrile, Orihalcum and Adamantite ores. Money and gifts in a 
single trip if you go to level 10, not bad hm?

Give Won every gold ore you fetched out of the mine, and he'll adore you very 
soon. He'll allow you to sell items to him, and usually at a better price than 
Zack will, as well as items that Zack won't take. Won in MFoMT is one of the 
better ways to get money, but you need to carry the items with you, instead of 
shipping them. So you can sparingly sell Won some of the rarest items for an 
extra bit of money. If you're on the Boy Version FoMT, don't worry about Won 
at all.

So until the 18th, just keep doing rounds of gifts to the sprites, Ellen, 
Carter and the sprites.

--Spring 18--
The 18th is the Horse Race! Too bad yours isn't big enough, but don't you worry 
about it this year. You can't race until year 2, but there's still something 
great to do here.

First of all, you don't need to get to the town square before the end of it. I 
mean that you don't need to be there at 10am, you can go there just before 6pm 
and it will be fine. Just be sure not to miss it.

None of the shops are open today, and everyone is at the square, so you can 
skip the gifts for today. Spend the day on your crops, animals, mining, do 
whatever you want otherwise. Before 6pm head to the square with your basket, 
but don't enter it. Save right before walking into the square. You'll see why.

You can bet on races this year, and there's a great way to make money here, so 
why not abuse it? First simply watch the races a few times, to get an idea of 
the winners. It won't always be the same, but 90% of the time it will. Watch 
the winning odds. It costs you about 5000G to put 99 coins on a single horse, 
so you'll want to maximise that. And for that you want to watch the payout 
rate of the winners. Try to judge where your 5000G would get the highest 
payout.

For me, the first race never changed. The winner always had x3. But the second 
and third race often had the fastest horse on x7 to x11 payout. THOSE are the 
ones you want. So don't go betting on the first if its only x3, bet on the 
second race if the payout is good, and on the third. If the payout was under 
x7 on every race, reload and try again, the odds change most of the time.

Don't worry if you use up all of your money. You'll want to earn about 1700 
medals total. If you can't seem to rise that high, get over 700 medals at 
least.

After the three races, use your medals to buy things. So what to buy? Well, 
Broaches are what you want for good money here. Fill your basket with 30 of 
them, they cost 18 medals and sell for 2000G each. That means 60000G for a 
full basket! You can hold 8 on yourself too, so that means 38. If you pick a 
39th, you can leave the basket there and come back to get it later, noone will 
touch it. But 39 truly is the maximum you can get.

If you have lots of medals left, you can buy the Power Berry for 900. You'll 
keep the rest of the medals for the next time. Don't buy the Jewel of Truth, 
simply because you don't have anywhere to store it yet, and you can't get the 
rest of them either.

Put everything fromy our basket and hands in the bin once home, and you're 
done for this festival. You should have some 70000G on you at 5pm the next 
day, when Zack comes over to pickup everything you have. Don't worry if you're 
broke until then.

--Spring 19 to 29--
Now you're practically rolling in cash? Well not quite, but you have more than 
enough for the rest of the month. Keep your crops rolling, keep taking care of 
your horse, dog, chickens and gifts every morning. Buy a cow if you want, get 
the milker from the blacksmith too. The cows can be bought on the bottom 
farms, the rightmost one, for 5000G. Buy enough feed for a while, since you 
didn't start on grass yet. 

Speaking of grass, go buy several bags with your new money. Don't start fencing 
the place yet, no need to while you don't have a steady source of wood. Start 
growing the grass from in front of the barn, and stretch it left, leaving a 
space along the side to plant fences later.

A bit of math here, if you want to keep your animals outside you'll need to 
count 1 tile per animal per day of mature grass. The maximum you can get is 8 
cow/sheep at first, so you'll need 56 tiles of grass at most. If you get 16 
later, you'll need 112 tiles. For 8 animals, this means you'll have to plant 7 
blocks (3x3) of grass. For 16 animals, you'll need 13.

You won't need to fence in more than this, the rest of the area will be used 
differently. Just make sure its in front of the doors to the barn, so you can 
push your cows/sheeps out straight into it later.

You might get another Power Berry from tiling your field. The location is 
random, so the best chance is usually when you're tiling large areas, like for 
the grass you've just prepared.

There's a cooking festival during this period, but since you can't cook 
anything yet, I decided to skip it altogether this year.

Keep giving gifts to the sprites, they will be helpful soon enough. Aqua's 
birthday is on 26th, so concentrate the gifts on him, even if you never gave 
him anything the rest of the month because the herbs aren't of his color.

And with some free time if you have any, start leveling up your tools. Some 
tools will level on their own, but most of them will require some extra 
effort. Each tools have different ways to efficiently level them up. 

Hammer : Take it to the Spring Cave, where you mine. Don't go down levels, 
         just smash the rocks on the first level. Bring your basket and put 
         all of the copper and silver ores in it for some small cash flow 
         while you do this.

Hoe : Do the same as the hammer, but work on the ground instead. Ignore the 
      stairs, and keep plowing. You'll get some black herbs, which you can eat 
      since they aren't worth alot. You can also find money bags, only worth 
      10G each, but its better than nothing.

Watering Can : It will most probably be up in the gold by the end of Spring, 
               so don't worry too much about it the rest of the time. If you 
               need to train it, use the Spring Cave and fill its water from 
               the Goddess Spring right beside it.

Scythe : Clean your garden of every herb everyday. It will train on its own 
         mostly.

Those are the easiest since you get to do something while training them. All 
of them can be trained in the Spring Cave if need is. Since time doesn't go 
by, you can use them over and over, and rest in the hot baths when tired, 
until the day is over.

Your goal is to achieve 4 levels for each. Check in the Tools section for 
information on their levels.

You can get them done in any order you want, but I would suggest getting 
Hammer and Axe done as soon as you can, because they will help to clear the 
rest of your field. Furthermore, if you can get the Axe done first, it will be 
extremely useful to gather wood for your house extension. Remember that giving 
the hammer or hoe means you can't mine anymore for a few days. I went with 
Hammer and hoe first because they are used to mine the ores for each of them, 
and having them already done lets me get the ores before the next one is 
ready.

Once you have one or more tools that you can upgrade to Mystrile, go down the 
mine to at least level 5, and break rocks to get a Mystrile stone. Bring the 
tool and the stone to the blacksmith, and he'll take 5000G and 4 days to 
upgrade the tool. As said in the tools section, skipping straight to Mystrile 
saves money and time.

You can get your tool back 4 days later, and drop another over on the same 
day, if you have the Mystrile ore. Since mining will be a bit difficult with 
missing tools, concentrate on gifts and training the rest of the tools. You 
can get 3 tools to Mystrile by the end of the month, possibly.

--Spring 30--
Nothing very different here, save for an event. Kai comes back to town. You can
witness the scene if you out of your farm toward town after 6pm but before 7pm 
or so, a few girls obviously enjoying the guy's company. If you're playing the 
girl version, he's one of the possible choices for you to marry, but he's only 
there in summer every year, so you have to make the gifts count if anything. 
He particularly loves Pineapples.

Its the last day of spring, so after you're done harvesting, use the scythe to 
get rid of the leftover crops you have. When it turns into summer, they won't 
grow anything, so you need the space for new crops.

In preparation for summer, you can buy Pineapple seeds from Won's shop. They 
are worth the most money during summer. You'll also want to grow some other 
crops, like Corn that you can turn into chicken feed if you need to. Problem 
is you can't buy them until its actually summer, from the supermarket, so 
you'll need to wait until Summer 2nd (1st is a festival).

Lastly, if you can spare some cash buy several bags of spring seeds for next 
year. If you can stock up on many, you'll be able to seed your fields from the 
first day instead of waiting on the second day. Yes, the first day of spring 
is a holiday, so you can't buy seeds. If you can't don't worry about it too 
much.

If you kept giving gifts to Won in MFoMT, he will eventually let you play an 
apple game. If you manage to guess at least twice in a row what apple he 
names, you'll get a ticket for a sort of roulette game. Just try to take to 
him holding the Ticket to play it. If you can get 2 same numbers, you'll get 
some random seeds from his shop, 1 to 5 bags of them. If you can get 3 same 
numbers or in a sequence (like 4-5-6), you can win a record. You probably 
don't have the record player, but Won will buy it from you for anywhere 
between 80,000 and 160,000. Just keep refusing him until he gives you a 
high price for it. 

Its another way to have a quick cash inflow early in the game. It takes some 
patience, but you can repeat this indefinitly. If you miss the first apple 
game, you can talk to him over the counter to challenge him again for only 
100G. Its cheap compared to the prizes you can get in the roulette game, but 
you can always just save and reload here as well. If you have the boy version, 
there are other ways to make money. They just decided to throw this one in, 
and there are some bugs about Won's dialogs too, so it seems like its quickly 
added more than anything.

The main trick to winning Won's game is following one of the three apple and 
remembering its name. If he picks your apple, fine. If he picks another apple, 
you got one out of two chances to have it right. Its about the best odds you 
can get, unless you're extremely good at following three apples at the same 
time.

=================
Summer First Year
=================

Summer is the season to consolidate all you've been working on in Spring. If 
you followed my advices, you should have some left over cash from the horse 
races still, 2 or 3 tools to Mystrile, and most of the others trained to their 
maximum. You should have a full chicken coop too, and you possibly bought a 
cow. You'll buy more eventually, but you should start by taking care of your 
crops and upgrade your house in this season.

The best money makers are Pineapples and Corn in summer. You can also use the 
corn for chicken feed. Just throw the harvested corn into the small mill near 
the chicken coop to get 30 pieces of food. Most crops are renewable, so you 
don't need to reseed them everytime. 

If you got your sprites to a high affection level, how about getting them to 
work for you? Get some to water your crops, so you can use 3x3 blocks. They 
will be able to water the center one. No need to make them work for your 
animals yet.

Thought you can't buy/plant seeds on the first day, it is to note that the 
only thing you miss by planting on the second day is a single harvest of 
corn, so its not so bad.

Another point of interest in summer, check the weather everyday. Its the 
season of hurricanes. Use the save and reload tricks to force the weather to 
stay sunny or rainy at worse. Avoid hurricanes if you value your farm. Animals 
left outside can be lost, fences will be ripped off, grass patches will 
disapear, some crops will be gone, and rocks/branches will litter the whole 
place. Not to mention that during the hurricane, you can't go out of the 
house, so you can't take care of animals inside the barn and coop. They will 
all be angry the next day for not being fed, unless the sprites were 
courageous enough to take care of them for that day. All in all, avoid 
hurricanes if you can.

Last thing about summer, the flowers, herbs and food change in the mountain 
area. So you have new things you can harvest by looking around. The forest 
still has some blue herbs, but there's also some red herbs, and the beach has 
purple herbs. So you can keep working on Staid (Blue) if he's not maxed, and 
if he's maxed hand the blue ones to other sprites instead.

As soon as you get your axe upgraded, start taking care of the stumps in your 
field, and cut wood in the forest and mountain to gain some more. You'll need 
alot of wood to upgrade your house, barn and coop.

--Summer 1--
The Beach Party, yay! Well, here's a chance to use your fishing rod for some 
extra cash. Bring your basket and use your rod to fish out a full basket of 
fishes. Don't toss too many things back in the sea thought, people don't like 
that. Fishes go in the basket for selling, the rest you can keep in your pack 
until you can get rid of it. If you don't care for what people think of you, 
throw it back. But I think Sprites don't like it either.

You won't take home an amazing amount unless your rod is higher level, which is 
probably not the case by now, but since you don't burn energy during festival, 
you can take your time to catch as many as you want before going on. If you 
were like me you went with the farm tools first, like Axe, Hammer and Hoe, so 
fishing rod isn't that useful yet. But keep training it, there's two festivals 
you can fish in summer, and you should get it to Mystrile before then.

You can still give gifts to the sprites during holidays. If you concentrated 
only on the orange, yellow and blue in spring, you'll get to boost the 
affection of two new sprites with the new available herbs. The beach has a 
bunch of Purple herbs too, but you can't get to them today because of the 
beach party. If Staid has maxed friendship, give the blue herbs to someone 
else.

Since the shops are closed, there isn't much to do before the party. But if 
you bought the pineapple seeds, you can plant them. As said, you can take some 
time to realign your fields now, and do 3x3 squares, if you hire the sprites 
to water and harvest the middle part that you can't reach. If not keep with 
the donut and shallow-u shapes. You only need to get to the beach before 6pm 
to be part of it.

--Summer 2 to 6--
You'll probably want to spend a part of the day preparing your field for the 
new crops, and buy the seeds for it in town. Also if you kept giving gifts to 
Carter, the back door will eventually be unlocked. It has more goodies to nab 
over there, for shipping, gifts or recipes. While there's nothing in summer, 
its good to have it done before Fall.

Keep training your last tools on your free time. Get a Mystrile ore early on 
days your new tool is ready, get your new tool and give another one to upgrade 
right away. Between two upgrades, remember to buy the Milker too, if you 
already haven't, before your cows gets old enough to give some milk.

Keep giving gifts to the Sprites. You should have one or two at a high 
affection level (at least 6 hearts), so send them to water your crops. I've 
seen that even a begginer Sprite is able to water 12 3x3 crops without missing 
any, so get them to work one at a time, especially if you've given your 
watering can to be reforged. You'll be stuck without watering for 4 days 
without it, so ask a Sprite to take care of the water for 7 days during that 
time.

Make sure that you always have new sprites to replace the previous ones when 
their work schedule is over. This will start training them for the very busy 
fall season.

Remember that when the sprites are working in your field, you can still give 
them gifts. For that reason, Blue (Staid) and Red (Chef) are good choices 
because there's alot of herbs of their color right next to the farm. Its easy 
to go pick a few and give it to them while they are working.

On Day 6, Rick will come to pick one of the chicken off for the festival of 
the next day. Don't worry he won't eat it. Try to give him the younguest one. 
I'll explain why later.

--Summer 7--
The Chicken Sumo Festival! It starts at 10am, but you can be there before 6pm 
as usual. So take care of your chores, and if you think you have time take 
herbs for the sprites.

Save before entering the Town Square. The Chicken Sumo is a pretty frustrating 
game since it sometimes doesn't seem to follow any logic, especially with low 
affection chickens. Talk to Rick for a small explanation that doesn't make all 
that much more sense.

Basically, you just use one button, A. It will send a signal for your chicken 
to try and intimidate your opponent into fleeing. But don't press the button 
off the start. It seems that the first 'attack' always misses. It seems easier 
if you wait for your opponent to do the first move, and then intimidate it off 
ring. But sometimes its random as your chicken moves and faces other 
directions. Can't help you much there, but try to intimidate only when facing 
the opponent or close enough. If you're both one over the other or just about, 
attack and hope it works. Else you can be pushed off easily.

Reload if it doesn't work, as it can go against you easily. There's very 
little skill involved. That's why even the youngest chickens (with less 
affection) can still win.

Why should we pick the youngest? Because he will live younger than the others. 
The prize is that your chicken will be able to lay better quality eggs later. 
But first you need it to rise its affection. Since it will live longest, 
you'll eventually get to that point. In the earning screen your chicken will 
have a crown as a testimony of winning the event.

--Summer 8 to 19--
So, is your axe ready? If so, take some time to cut the extra stumps in the 
forest and near the hot baths for some wood. You'll need 200 pieces, which you 
can check in your earnings screen (select button, remember). Upgrade your 
house for 200 wood and 3000G, you'll be happy of the results.

Keep chopping wood nearly everyday, along with your watering, harvesting and 
animal caretaking. Give gifts if you still have time. More wood will be 
needed to upgrade the house, coop and barn later on. You could always buy the 
wood, but its a waste of money mostly, since there's at least 7 stumps worth 6 
pieces of wood each a day. 5 near Gotz's cabin and 2 near the hot baths. 
There's a last one on the west side of the mountain too, but its a waste of 
time for a single one. If your Axe is Mystrile, a single 5th level charge will 
chop them down (that's when you're red and 'angry').

When you finally get to upgrade your house, you'll get new items on sale 
through the TV station on saturdays. Including the Refrigerator, which lets 
you keep anything edible, up to 99 each. So start saving a few crops, grapes 
and herbs of each kind if you want to, for later uses, recipes and other stuff. 

The other item of interest is Shelves, for the same price of 2500G, you can 
store anything else that isn't edible. Finally you have a place to store the 
Jewel of Truth, ores or other useful things.

The other thing that will be offered on TV are the Kitchen and some of its 
tools. 

Once you got your house extension underway, you can start fencing a small area 
near the chicken coop, and put your chickens outside. I believe it makes them 
happier quicker, you'll save on their food because they will eat off the 
ground, and when they spend enough days outside the quality of their eggs can 
also increase. You still need to 'lift them up' once a day to increase their 
affection.

Same for cows, but they need grass, so you can wait until fall for an easier 
time. Meanwhile start fencing some larger area slowly, for the cows, and 
spreading grass everywhere you can. Start in from of the cow barn, so you can 
just push them out into the fenced area and close it behind them once done. I 
suggest just 6 or 9 tiles down, and across from the corner to the front of 
the barn.

Once fenced, remember to take a moment to check on the state of your fence 
too, because parts can rot. Fortunatly you can check on it using the farm map. 
Replace any part quickly to avoid your animals being attacked during the night.

The 16th is Timid's birthday too, the green Sprite. Giving him most of the 
herbs that day will probably get him maxed out in affection or very high. Even 
better if you give him Green Herbs.

On the 19th, Barley will come to take one of your cows. If you have an adult 
cow that isn't sick and can give milk, go ahead and let him take the one with 
the highest affection. But in the first year, you probably won't have more 
than a heart or two at this point. Well its worth trying anyway.

--Summer 20--
The Cow festival is a bit like the Chicken Festival, in the way that if you 
can win, your cow can potentially give better milk. The difference is that the 
score is from judging, not from some makeshift minigame. So even putting your 
best cow in the first year probably won't help much.

Saving and loading doesn't change a thing in this festival, unless you saved 
before giving the cow to Barley a day before. So better luck next year.

As usual, you can spend the day as you want and go to the Square before 6pm to 
attend to the event. You're sent back home at 6pm, so you can finish a few 
things before bed. Since there's no shops, you can't give gifts to anyone else 
than the sprites.

--Summer 21 to 23--
Continue on your farm work. By now you might have upgraded all of your tools to 
Mystrile. If that's the case its perfect. Else keep working on them steadily. 
You'll want them all done by winter, so you still have some time. If you got 
the shelves, you can go fetch a few Mystrile ores in advance and store them 
for later use, instead of going to get one everytime.

Keep at least 1 corn in your fridge, just in case of emergency. You see, if 
you run out of food for the chickens in the middle of winter, you could use a 
corn on the mill to get 30 chicken feed. Even if you can buy the feed cheaply 
enough, if that happened on a holiday, you're out of luck.

Lastly keep on chopping wood everyday for the house, coop and barn extensions. 
The third House Extension requires 700 logs and 10000G. The chicken coop 
extension need 420 wood, and the barn extension 500 wood. If you had lots of 
money you could buy the wood off him too I guess, else you'll have to work it 
yourself. 

--Summer 24--
Fireworks Festival starts at 6pm, shops are closed, yadda yadda. Sprites are 
still available, so take some time to offer a few gifts, and take care of your 
tasks and wood chopping.

Head to the beach before 9pm, and bring your basket for some unlimited energy 
and time fishing. I had a Mystrile rod by then, but only fished crap. Ah well.

--Summer 25 to 29--
The end of the month tasks.

Buy plenty of grass seeds, and start tiling and seeding them in the lower 
right corner of the map. No need to stretch it very high, and give yourself 
some space on the left of the farm for your chicken area. With grass, the herbs 
will stop popping on the ground all over the place. And it will be good to get 
lots of feed for the cows and sheeps for winter. You only need to keep them in 
a smaller space to avoid them running around or getting attacked at night.

Speaking of, get yourself a few more Cows/Sheeps by the end of the month, if 
you want to. 

Start planning where next season's crops will be. Fall is the BIG season for 
money. Better get those sprites hired, else you won't be able to keep up with 
everything either. Anyway, plan to have lots of space. You can even put them 
side by side if you don't need to water or harvest them yourself, no need for 
space in between the crops to walk around anymore. Just try to figure where 
grass will be, and where crops will be.

Check the crop calendar, and cut the crops with your scythe once their last 
harvest for the season is done, to get some work done in prevision of the next 
season.

--Summer 30--
The last day of Summer, all of the harvesting should be done, so now you can 
use your scythe to take everything down and retile the ground for your fall 
crops as you planned. Spend the day doing this if you need to really, it will 
be worth it. If you can go buy some more seeds, so you can plant early next 
year instead of losing a day.


===============
Fall First Year
===============

This is easily where you'll rake the most money just by crops alone this year. 
If you did well, you should have managed to keep some money over the month of 
summer, from crops, eggs, milk and whatever money you had made out of the 
Horse Race bets.

If you are good friends with Carter, you'll get access to a few rare truffles 
everyday in the back of his church. Its a good deal. Keep making friends with 
Ellen as well, you'll need her help for winter.

And if your tools aren't upgraded to Mystrile yet, this is the last month to 
do it. In Winter you'll get to upgrade them even more if all of them are at 
Mystrile.

New goodies grow around the farm, mountain and forest now too. The Blue Herbs 
are gone, but you'll find more Red and Green herbs. Mushrooms also grow 
around. And your tree has 3 apples everyday, along with the usual honey. The 
beach only holds 2 indigo herbs this time around. Probably not worth the 
detour unless you go see Won.

You'll notice that your dog now jumps fences. Yup, he's now old enough. Try to 
stop by Won when you can and buy a frisbee. If you want you can spend days to 
train your dog at frisbee, for the event in Summer. Just go to the beach with 
your dog, and check the sign near Kai's restaurant. Your dog's ability rises 
with the total distance it 'catches'. A miss doesn't help at all, so 
save/reload to avoid those if you can.

In this season you'll want to upgrade the Barn and Chicken Coop so you can get 
some Makers. They will help you increase your profits from eggs, milk and wool, 
but also you need some yarn for Ellen in winter.

Look at the Fall Crop Calendar. Woo, busy month. Better keep the harvest 
sprites to work every day if you have both Peppers and Sweet Potatoes. But as 
you can see, its no contest which crop is the most profitable this month. 
Plant as many sweet potatoes as you want. You should have enough sprites with 
high friendship to keep watering and harvesting everyday. Which means you can 
go with 3x3 blocks as well. No need for space between rows, the sprites move 
everywhere.

--Fall 1--
Most obviously, today a trip to the shop is needed to get all the new seeds 
you'll want to grow on this day. If you have Sprites working already, plant 
them early for them to water. Else you'll need to water them yourself for 
today, which should be easy if you upgraded the watercan. 

Since fall is easily the most profitable, and if you got high affection for 
your sprites, you'll want to cram as many crops as you can. I went with 4 sets 
of 3x3 carrots, 4 times eggplants, and 20 times sweet potatoes. Two sprites 
can cover that many in a day, both for harvesting and watering, and even a bit 
more I bet. You don't need space in between the sets if sprites take care of 
everything, so you can put as many sets in a small space as you can.

You probably won't have alot of time for gifts today, but maybe you can go for 
some wood chopping and gathering things for shipping or your fridge in the 
mountain.

--Fall 2--
Carter will come to invite you to church for a music festival. Go ahead!

Spend the day as you wish, with gifts, wood chopping and animal caretaking. 
Hopefully you have enough sprites to water everything.

If you have the money and you planted some, buy more carrot seeds in advance. 
You can harvest them 4 times through the fall season, so you'll want 4 times 
the seeds you have crops for them. Since I had 4 sets, I bought 16 total in 
the month. That will avoid running out of seeds, and you can replant them as 
early as they are harvested. All of the others regrow without seeding.

--Fall 3--
You only need to go to church after 6pm and before midnight, so take your 
time. How about going into the mine for some adamantite? You'll need 3 of 
them for the blacksmith to make you some new tools. You need your coop and/or 
barn upgraded for those first. You can still gather the adamantite for 
the purpose and store it in your shelves until needed. 

As a note, its saturday, but the bar is closed so you can't buy anything 
through TV. So what do you do? Wait on Sunday. You have until Wednesday to buy 
the things on TV, even if they won't be showing what's on for sale past 
Saturday. As long as you saw what's on sale, use the phone.

--Fall 4 to 8--
Back to the normal work until the next festival. Keep befriending the sprites 
and Ellen, and Carter if he didn't unlock his backdoor yet.

If planted on the first day, the first harvest would be Sweet Potatoes on the 
6th! That fast huh? Yeah, and its going to be harvested every 2 days from now 
on, so you'll need every sprite you can get to work on this, else you won't 
maximize your income this season. Be sure to check when they stop working for 
you to get them replaced.

If you're not sure of when you need a harvest, either check the calendar, or 
use a save/reload trick to peek on the next day. If there's no harvest, reload 
the previous day and tell your harvesting sprites that they are done. Then you 
can hire them back for the day after.

You can do the same to watering sprites if its going to rain. Or else you'll 
have to go ask for two sprites to pick up the work when the others will be 
done (1D left).

--Fall 9--
An easy Festival, just bring whatever you can that is edible like one of your 
crops, or a poisonous mushroom for some funny result. Once again, you can go 
just before 6pm. You'll get to toss what you brought in a mix with the others.

--Fall 10 to 12--
Uneventful days overall. 10th is Hoggy's (Yellow sprite)'s birthday, so try to 
cram the gifts on that day to max him as well.

--Fall 13--
The Moon Festival. That's where you're supposed to ask the one you prefer to 
watch the stars. But if you concentrated on making money at first, you 
probably won't have a contender just yet. Ah well. Next year you'll start 
wooing for sure. If you don't have anyone, nothing to do here, and shops are 
closed.

From this day until the sheep festival, don't clip the wool off your best 
sheep, and don't impregnate it either if you want it to participate. You 
probably won't win unless you bought the sheep early in the year, but its your 
choice.

--Fall 14--
Duke will come over today to ask you to help with the vineyard. Accept, and 
he'll ask to bring someone else. Only one will accept this job, and its Cliff 
in the church. Hire him too, and take care of the day as usual.

Today is also Chef's birthday (Red Sprite), give him lots of gifts if he's not 
maxed yet.

--Fall 15--
You'll have to be at the vineyard at 10am, that doesn't give you alot of time 
in the morning. Take care of what you can, and go there afterward. If you got 
Cliff to help, well you did a good action because he'll be offered a job, and 
he'll be able to stay in town afterwards. If you hadn't, Cliff would have left 
before the end of the year. You'll be released at 5pm, so clean a bit what you 
can around the farm before bed.

--Fall 16 and 17
Two ordinary days, nothing of importance here.

--Fall 18th--
Horse races! Well your own horse still isn't big enough, but you can still bet 
and make lots of cash. Just use the same strategy. Observe a few times by 
saving before entering the square and reloading. And then try to hit some x7 
to x15 winners. Its possible that you lose too, you can always reload. Then 
load your basket with broaches to sell.

This time you might want to buy the Jewel of Truth too. You have shelves to 
store it this time. If you haven't the first time, get the Power Berry too. 
You only need 540 medals to fill your basket of Broaches, so plan accordingly 
for the amount of medals you need. 1000 for the Jewel of Truth, 900 for the 
Power Berry.

You only need to get to the square before 6pm, so take care of the farm first.

--Fall 19 and 20--
Usual days, except Barley will come over for a sheep this time, on the 20th. 
Just like the cow festival. Nothing to note otherwise. Only 10 days until 
winter.

--Fall 21--
The Sheep Festival is just like the cow festival, meaning you can't do a thing 
about the winner really. All you can do is offer your sheep with the most 
affection. You need to be there before 6pm as usual. Remember that your sheep 
is in the barn when you go back home, so bring it back outside with the 
others, or feed it inside.

--Fall 22 to 29--
The last stretch to winter. Keep your sprites working, your animals outside and 
well kept. If you go by the general store, buy 3 chocolates for the upcoming 
festival, and store it aside until then. When passing in front of the clinic, 
buy a few Bodigizer and Turbojolt as well, for the mining task in winter.

You can bring your animals inside if you want, but you can wait until the last 
day of fall as well. Its faster to take care of them inside, game-time wise, 
but you need to feed them yourself of course. You don't need to worry about 
fences while inside either, which might help do more things during the day.

On the 29th, once the day is nearly over, 'fire' all of the sprites that are 
set to watering. You won't need them on the next day. You'll want to keep the 
harvesters just in case you get a last set of crops.

--Fall 30--
The last day of Fall, and then its winter. Fire all of the sprites once the 
day is over, and bring the animals inside. Make sure you feed them from now 
on. Spend the day to cut every bit of grass in your field. You can hold 999 
pieces at most (you can check in the Earning screen too).

During the day some kids will come knocking for candies. Its the Great Pumpkin 
festival, or halloween if you prefer. Give them the chocolate you bought so 
they'll be happy. The first one is as early as 6am. Second one arrives at 8am. 
Last one is evidently on 10am. Popuri finds it unfair and wants some too, 
apparently.

=================
Winter First Year
=================
Woo, now you're done with the harvesting and watering for a while. You should 
buy some more cows and sheeps to keep you busy and keep some cash flow. If 
you've made the makers already, you can increase the profits from milk, wool 
and eggs by turning them into cheese, yarn and mayonnaise before shipping. 

Keep your animals inside all season, meaning that you'll save alot of time on 
taking care of them. I don't find sprites to be useful, all they can do is 
keep you from getting the milk, eggs and wool before you do, thus keeping you 
from changing them into cheese, etc.

What will you do the rest of your days? Well the mountain lake is now frozen 
over, giving you the chance to cross over for the winter mine! That's where 
we're going. The gems inside are worth alot more than the adamantite and 
orihalcum you had in the spring mine, so that will help on the money making.

But that's not all there is to it. We're going there to find the Cursed tools 
as well. Cursed tools are even more powerful versions of your tools, but the 
problem is that you can't unequip them. You can always get them off by talking 
to Carter in the confessional, but that's not very efficient in any way.

There are ways to uncurse them permanently, but we'll get there into due time. 
First we need to get them out of the mine. There are also other goodies to get 
in there.

Also, since you don't need the sprites in this season, go once in a while with 
gifts for them to keep their affection high, or max out those that aren't yet. 
They love flour from the shop, its closeby and cheap. They like it about as 
much as herbs of their color, so it won't take long either.

You should have a nice tidy sum from the non-stop fall harvest. Don't spend it 
all, but use what's needed to upgrade house, barn, coop as needed, and buy 
things off TV. Your tools should be all to Mystrile now, or else you won't get 
those Cursed Tools at all.

During this season, also watch the weather channel for snowstorms. When they 
tell you to keep animals inside and lock doors, that's nothing good. You might 
want to trick the weather to be good or snowy when that happens.

Last thing, if you want a extra bonus for the Stocking Festival, you need a 
sock. Ellen is the only one that can make you one. If your friendship with her 
is VERY high, give her some yarn of any quality, before 11am or noon, and she 
will offer you socks if you wait the rest of the day. But if she takes the 
yarn normally, that means you're not high enough yet. So keep pumping her 
friendship.

Winter 13 is her birthday, so you might want to concentrate the gifts on that 
day more than any other if she still won't make you socks.

--Winter 1--
Its saturday, so you shouldn't forget to buy things off the TV. Drop every 
tool in your house except the hoe and hammer,, get the basket if you want, and 
bring with you a couple of Turbojolt and Bodigizer. Take a dip in the hot bath 
or your house bath if you have it to recuperate what you've lost from taking 
care of your animals, and off to the mine we go. 

Go to the mountain area with the big lake. Oh look, you can cross it now that 
its frozen. On the other side you'll see the mine. But wait, don't go in yet. 
Go BEHIND it and check for a Power Berry! Wee. Now go inside.

So what is our goal? Depends on what you want to do, but you should probably 
prioritize getting the cursed tools out of there. There are 6 tools in here, 
so you should have enough space to carry them all. Also they are found in the 
ground, so its possible to get them all in one trip. Use either of the Save 
Tricks given in the mining section.

The first stop is level 19. Dig around for another Power Berry. Then every 
following level finishing in -9 will have a Cursed Tool in the ground, in the 
order of Fishing Rod (first? Damn.), Hoe, Ax, Hammer, Watering Can and Sickle. 
So the last floor would be level 79.

Like the stairs, the position of the tools are random, and sometimes there is 
none. Use the save tricks until you hit both stairs and tools, if you want to 
conserve energy as much as possible.

When you have a Cursed TOol, be careful when you switch tools using the L+B 
shortcut. You might equip the Cursed tool by mistake and then be unable to 
take it off. To avoid that go through the A+B rucksack menu instead. But if 
you are here only for cursed tools, you'll only need the hoe normally. If you 
equip one by mistake, reload your save.

The other item of interest is the Kappa Jewel, which is another stone like the 
Jewel of Truth that you will need 9 of. Considering that you only can carry 8 
items at a time, you might just want to catch a few and try again later for 
more. They are found on levels 0, 40, 60, 80, 120, 140, 160, 180 and 255, 
level 0  being the level you actually enter the mine in. They are found in 
rocks. On this trip you'll probably want to stop on level 80 at most, so you 
might get 4 (0, 40, 60, 80).

If you brought the basket, its not advisable to do both gems and cursed tools, 
because of the energy issue, but you'll find that all gems are already worth 
more than Adamantite/Orihalcum, at 55 gold. They are listed in detail in the 
mining section.

Also on level 30 and 70 (if you stop for the cursed tools only), you have a 
'chance' of finding a Pink Diamond worth 10000. You'll have to break rocks for 
it, and there's one, rarely two, and sometimes none of them. If you really 
want it, keep reloading until you find one relatively fast, again for energy 
issues.

On level 50 you'll similarly find an Alexandrite, for 10000 as well. Note that 
this is an exceptionnal floor that you'll ONLY find Alexandrite, if any at 
all. Like the Pink Diamond its possible there won't be any.

So grab what you can and get out of the mine. 

--Winter 2 to 13--
In these days, beside your animals, go back to the mine if you have anything 
else to do there. If you found all cursed tools thought, you might want to 
consider uncursing them first. Check the Tool section for the way to uncurse 
them all.

When you get to the tools that you need to equip for 10 days, enlist the help 
of a sprite for your animals. You won't be able to brush or milk/clip them, 
but you can still talk to them.

On winter 2, if its not snowing, Thomas the Mayor should come and ask you for 
some random item. Save on the night before, and keep reloading until he asks 
an item that you can get easily. Easiest to get are Black Grass from the mine, 
White Grass from behind Gotz's House, Truffles if you kept any from behind 
the church in Fall, Bracelet (make at Blacksmith with Orihalcum), Diamond 
(Winter Mine floors -0) or Moon Stone (Winter Mine floors -8). Pick whatever 
you find is easier for you, and reload until satisfactory.

The reward for the trade off is the Golden Fence! Well it sounds nice, looks 
nice, doesn't even rot away like normal fence... but everyone in the village 
will hate you and then call you Moneybags, no matter what's your real name. 
Just store it away, or if you're playing the girl version, sell it to Won for 
a nice price, he likes those things.

The rest of the days, do what you can, depending on your situation (Cursed 
Tools and such). Note that there are other things in the Spring Mine too, but 
since its open all year long, we can concentrate on the Winter Mine for the 
moment.

If you are good friends with Ellen, offering her some yarn, she might offer 
you to make socks with it. But this might be difficult in the first year, she 
requires lots of gifts to be very good friends. Might want to try that next 
year worse case.

But if you give her alot of gifts, especially on her birthday on Winter 13th, 
eventually she'll accept a ball of yarn as normal gift and instead of the 
usual message, she'll say that she'll make you socks with it. You'll be 
'warped' to 6pm and receive stockings that will be hung on the wall of your 
house by Stu when you get back home. Note that you need to give it to her 
between 9 and 11am for her to make the socks.

You'll probably have lots of time on your hands in this season, so you could 
go get the other Jewel of Truth scattered around. There's some you can't get 
yet thought.

One is on your doghouse, and another in the water of your horse's house. 
Simple enough? A third is on the lamppost straight in front of the church. 
Easy. Another is sold by Won for 50000. That's a bit much, but eventually 
you'll buy it if you can't now. Another was at the Horse Races, if you got 
it before. If not you'll have another race in Spring to buy it for 
1000 medals. And a last is in the Library, second floor, right books on the 
bottom row. That's 6. Just store them away, because the last ones are very 
very VERY far way from now.

On the 13th, don't worry if its not snowing the next day because its 
Thanksgiving. Buy some chocolate if you're playing the girl version. Today is 
also Ellen's birthday, if you really want to pump her friendship.

If you're still bored because you don't even have Cursed Tools to uncursed, do 
some trips to the Winter Mine for the Kappa Jewels or more cash (gems, pink 
diamonds, alexandrite). Or to the Spring Mine for the Goddess Gems. Note that 
you'll still need to go to level 255 of the Spring mine later in the game, for 
something else, so you can wait until then.

--Winter 14--
Winter Thanksgiving is the equivalent of Valentine's day. But in Japan, on 
Valentine's Day girls give chocolate to the boys they like, and on March 14th, 
White Day, the boys answer the girl with chocolate of their own if they like 
the girl as well. In this game its similar, except the Spring Thanksgiving is 
the replacement of the White Day.

So if you're playing the girl version, give some chocolate to the guy you 
prefer, if you already started wooing some in the first year. Heck, just give 
some to every guy in town if you want to. If you're on the boy version, you'll 
get chocolate if one or many of the girls have high affection ratings. They 
will come to your house every 2 hours starting at 8am to give you something.

Otherwise this is a normal day, but without shops.

--Winter 15 to 23--
Can it get any more routine than this? Well nothing to note here, just keep 
taking care of your animals, or have the sprites do it if you're holding one 
of the Cursed Tools for 10 days. If not you can always mine deeper.

Check the mining section, for valuable gems, Goddess Gems and Kappa Gems once 
again.

--Winter 24--
Starry Night Festival. If you have a girl/boy with high enough affection, they 
will invite you to watch the stars at their house. If you don't have anyone, 
well its mostly a family reunion, so you won't have anything to do on that day.

--Winter 25--
Stocking Festival, or christmas for our world. Its mostly the same, except 
that Santa is replaced by Mayor Thomas. If you have a sock hung in your home, 
he'll fill it with a random item. Its not worth much, but its free. Its the 
thought that counts! You need to be in bed between 9pm (25th) and Noon next 
day (26th) for him to come over. Sneaky old man.

Otherwise the day chores go as normal.

--Winter 26 to 29--
What a boring season, really. Nothing to mention here. Did you uncurse all of 
the possible tools? You should normally only have the tools that need to be 
used 255 times left (Fishing Pole and Axe). Else hopefully it will be done 
during the last days of winter, because Spring is around the corner and you 
want your hands free by then.

If you're done holding the cursed tools, there is another power berry to be 
fetched with the fishing rod. Since you have lots of time doing nothing, you 
can go get this one at the beach. Go fish there, and you might find it. I 
suggest saving before starting, and if you don't find it in the same day, just 
reload and try until you get it, so you won't spent several days on this. And 
this only works in winter, so you can get it out of the way.

--Winter 30--
Two days of New Year Celebrations basically. You have two choices for this 
day. Either you head to the top of the mountain (Mother Hill) or to Rose 
Square. That just depends on how or with who you want to greet the new year.

Before you do, if you saved some seeds from spring last year, you'd better ask 
your sprites to help you water them starting the next day. Else you can leave 
them celebrate new year in peace.

The biggest difference is that you'll get some free Buckweath flour from the 
square celebration. In fact, they fill your rucksack and hands with it, so 
you might want to choose that one for cooking ingredients. The mountain top 
star gazing doesn't have any prize.

While you're there, bring your two cursed tools, and keep using them both 
until they uncurse. And voila! All 6 tools are now Blessed for the second 
year. In this Festival, your energy is unlimited, so you won't go tired of 
using the two cursed tools 255 times each. If you forgot, you have another 
chance on Spring 1st.

The Square Event is held starting at 6pm, and the Mother Hill event start at 
midnight, I believe.

=================
End of First year
=================
Now let's recap what we have done on this year.
-All tools up to Mystrile.
-Cursed versions acquired and then Blessed.
-Full Chicken Coop, barn is up to you.
-6 Jewel of Truth.
-6 or 7 Power Berries (Depends on the one in the Spring Cave mainly).
-All sprites have high affection.
-Befriended Carter and Ellen
-House fully extended with Bath
-Chicken Coop and Barn upgraded
-Horse max affection
-Dog max affection
-Most kitchen tools (if your house is at the biggest level to buy them)

The festival results vary on if you had animals long enough so that they could 
win it (high affection), or just managing to win the Chicken Sumo Festival. The 
first year results in competition doesn't matter too much anyway, as long as 
you managed to get a good profit and high affection for your animals so you 
will earn more during the second year.

If all that is done in the first year, and have a decent amount of money to 
start the season, you're in great shape. You don't need alot of money to start 
with, just to buy the crops really. Your animals already provide with steady 
cash flow everyday.

How many cows/sheeps you have is up to what you can handle mostly, because its 
not necessary either to have it full. More cows/sheeps mean more potential 
money, but also more time to take care of them and more feed. Especially if 
they are outside.

If you haven't done all of these, don't worry too much either. This is what 
can possibly be done if you know the game well to start with. The first year 
is mostly getting things into gear and getting used to everything.

===========
Second Year
===========
Second year starts now. Since we've worked on getting the farm into shape the 
first year, what are we going to do on the second year?

You already know how to work your farm, how many crops you can take care of. 
The second year just pushes it a bit further. If you completed the list I've 
given for the first year, you'll just need to further improve upon this.

You don't need a step by step walkthrough anymore, so I'll go with the big 
lines of what you'll want to complete for every season.

==================
Spring Second Year
==================

Keep your animals inside unless they still need their affection to be raised. 
Put them outside only for that reason or to raise their G-products into P- and 
X-Products after the 600 hours outside.

Barley will come to check on the horse exactly a year after giving it to you, 
if its not raining. If you have at least 6 hearts, he should give it to you 
for good. Else he will take it back for a whole year from you.

If you kept your horse, it's now adult. Ride it around the farm at blazing 
speeds! It has satchels that act like shipping boxes too. You can't talk to it 
anymore, but you can still brush it.

Start handing gifts to your favorite marriage prospect, and raise their heart 
meter so you can witness the heart events along the way. Without the heart 
events, you won't get to the wedding, even if their heart meter is maxed.

Try to avoid too many rival heart events with the one you want to marry, else 
you might lose him/her to someone else. But usually they start marrying in the 
4th year, so you should have time to pick one before that.

In the boy version there is an extra girl that you can marry if you're 
unfortunate enough to have all of the others marry out, and its the Harvest 
Goddess herself, but she's hard to get.

In the Girl version, there's actually 3 other propects, but you can judge that 
they aren't incredibly tempting. Won is one of them, which is probably the 
best choice, even if not quite advisable. The Chef from the cooking contest is 
another (wow, desperate?) and the Kappa is the replacement of the Goddess 
(Why? Oh WHY!?). You'd definitly need to be in bad shape to pick one of them 
in my opinion, but oh well.
       
Yeah, the supermarket is closed on Tuesdays, and Spring 2nd is a Tuesday, 
unfortunatly. So if you didn't save seeds from last year, you have to wait on 
the third to buy them again. Else you can start on the first day for maximum 
crops.

Your goal is to ship 100 of the Turnips, Potatoes and Cucumber, so you can buy 
Strawberry seeds at the general store. You don't need to plant them this year, 
but they aren't available until you did this.

Another thing you want to aim for is getting 50 Blue Herbs and 50 Green Herbs 
shipped. Once that is done you'll be able to buy some BodygizerXL and 
TurbojoltXL from the clinic, which are twice as powerful as the ordinary 
versions. There's a few in the mountains everyday, so pick them up and ship 
them.

We didn't concentrate on this part the first year because its more important 
to get money at that point. Now we can fill up some holes left over from last 
year with new things. Its a good idea to save some of your crops for recipes 
too.

The goddess game on TV is back, from Spring 1st to 5th. You might not want to 
spend all that time for 5000G a day, but its up to you. 25000G for the 5 days 
isn't too bad. If not, play to at least get some rice cakes or buckwheat 
flour.

Your garden will need to be retiled again, but the grass will regrow on its 
own. You can use the hoe to retile grass before it grows again, if you decide 
to change the layout, but you'll need to reseed of course.

The fence is most probably rotten everywhere if you used lumber, but you don't 
need to bring your animals outside yet either. You could just leave them 
inside until you fix it, if you insist on keeping them in the sunlight.

Remember to rehire the sprites to work for you as well.

On the First day of Spring, head to the Square with an empty rucksack, after 
6pm, for the New Year celebration. They will fill your hands and ruck sack 
with rice cakes. Its a festival of course. Its your last chance to uncurse the 
255-uses tools while you're in the square, at least for a few weeks.

When you have some time, go into the Spring mine to look for Mythic Stones. 
Check the Mining section for more info. They are rare, worth 20000G shipped, 
but will allow you to eventually turn your Blessed tools into Mythic tools, 
the most powerful version. 

But it costs 50000G per tool to be reforged, so you might either sell the 
Mythic Stones or store them for later. You probably don't want to spend 
50000G on a tool that already does a great work. Mythic Stones don't appear 
unless all of your tools are Uncursed, remember that before doing the trip 
down.

If you feel really like it, apparently a glitch makes it that you can get more 
than one cursed tool once it becomes uncursed. I was holding a Blessed Hammer 
when I found a Cursed Hammer in the winter mine. Its just funny, because it 
doesn't have any practical use to it. Of course, the mine isn't accessible 
before winter, but I wanted to make this noted.

During Spring you'll also get some cucumbers. Keep 10 or more in your fridge, 
and start taking one everyday to the Mother Hill Lake. Toss it in for 10 days 
straight, and on the 11th the Kappa will give you a Blue Power Berry, 
increasing your Fatigue.

We didn't do this in the first year only because you didn't have anything to 
keep them in, aka a refridgerator. Keeping 10 of them was a problem with the 
spaced harvests of it. But this year it shouldn't be a problem to save 10 of 
them from the sprites's work. So once you got your cucumbers, start dropping 
them one per day at the lake near the Winter Mine.

Also if you can, bring your dog every sunny day to the beach for some frisbee 
throw practice. You can do that on the way to the sprites or shop without much 
of a detour, and practicing doesn't take game time. 

Horse Racing on the 18th, you'll finally get to ride your horse into the race. 
Save, and practice a few times to get the hang of the system. You need to give 
your horse small speed bursts, so you need to learn how to do it properly. 
Winning the first time earns you a Power Berry.

You can even bet on yourself for that usual batch of broaches. 60000G for a 
bit of work isn't that bad at all.

For the Cooking Contest, go to the square between 10am and noon. The Gourmet 
Chef will tell you what's the category of food to prepare. Then you go back 
home, cook the food, and bring it back for the judging. The Festival Guide 
lists a few relatively easy recipes to make that are practically assured of 
winning. Try to plan ingredients for the recipes listed there, or even cook 
some of them in advance.

==================
Summer Second Year
==================
Supermarket is closed on the first day, so hopefully you kept seeds from last 
year.

Its closed because of the beach festival. You should save before going to the 
beach. You'll be able to have your dog participate this time, and win a Power 
Berry if you do. Hopefully you practiced enough to get its bar higher, thus 
tossing it further.

While at the beach, you can fish with unlimited energy too. If you got your 
fishing rod at Blessed level, you should be getting some nice catches, and 
even a chance for Pirate Treasures (10000G) or Fossils (5000G) that both can 
be shipped (put in basket). Both are rare thought, but still.

You can fish after the disk throw event, so you make sure you've won it before 
spending all that time fishing.

For the crops, if you can ship 100 of the 3 basic crops (corn, tomato, onion), 
you'll get a new one to buy from the supermarket. That's the goal this year 
again. Don't worry too much about less income, the fact that you take care of 
alot more crops this year makes up for it.

Save some crops for recipes again. Save corn for chicken feed too. 99 corn in 
the fridge =~ 3000 chicken feed. Green herbs now grow in the mountain, so 
remember to get 50 shipped for the TurobjoltXL. Get some Wild Grapes too for 
recipes.

Keep working on your friendship with everyone in town, but especially your 
favorite boy/girl. Getting everyone happy is just to get recipes mostly.

Chicken Sumo Festival, bring one of your youngest chicken once again, and 
save/reload until you come out as a winner. You can win even with a chicken 
that has no hearts, with a bit of luck and patience.

Cow Festival, bring your best cow. Your cow should win if it has at least 8 
hearts, so try to give your youngest cow that has that much affection.

================
Fall Second Year
================
Carrot, Eggplant, Sweet Potato are your main crops again, for 100 of each. But 
I'm sure you already have more than enough Sweet Potatoes sent from last year. 
Plant some of each, and fill the rest with Green Peppers or Sweet Potatoes. 
Make sure you get your 100 shipped for Carrots and Eggplants thought, so you 
can buy the new kind of seeds for next year.

Sheep Festival, same thing as the cows in summer. Give the youngest one that 
has at least 8 hearts.

You should have already won the Horse Racing, but you can still earn the 
medals/broaches as usual here.

==================
Winter Second Year
==================
*yawn* I hate this season. So much of nothing to do. Beside taking care of 
animals, you can always go to the Winter Mine, and do a few trips for extra 
cash. If you followed my guide in the first year, you shouldn't have anything 
to do in there. You already got the Cursed Tools, Power Berry and Kappa Jewels. 
Else get them done this year.

You could always spend your time rising the cash for the Mythic Tools, if you 
haven't yet. Several trips to the Spring Mine to get Mythic Stones too.

=================
Third Year and up
=================
As far as this game goes, you're done with just about everything major to do. 
All that is left is making sure you marry if its not done, and complete a few 
odd and ends.

Starting in the third year, there is a new item in the Spring Mine, all the 
way down to the 255th floor. Get the Goddess Jewels along the way, if you 
haven't done that yet. I would have waited up to this point personally, 
because you don't want to go to level 255 that many times if you can avoid it.

Level 255 has the FrenchFries recipe, and the Teleport Stone. That stone 
allows you to basically move where you want on the map instantly. It appears 
only starting third year.

Some of your chickens will eventually die of old age. Chickens live around 
3 years, and barn animals 5 years. You should use these tips when this 
happens :

-Reloading the previous day, the result of dieing or not is random, so it 
 might live a few more days.
-If the animal keeps dieing too often and you need to reload too often, go 
 sell that animal for a nice sum, and buy/hatch a new one to replace.

Animals that won the contests (crowned) usually fetch a bigger sum too. They 
will die eventually so might as well get something out of them.

Once you got enough money and wood (999 lumber and 10,000,000G, wow), buy the 
Mountain House from Gotz and you'll get a Jewel of Truth from the calendar.

You'll be given another Jewel by the Mayor to congratulate on the 50 years of 
wedding, and you'll find the 9th and last one in the Mayor's fridge once you 
got all 8 others.

The Jewel of Truth tells you how much Stamina/Fatigue you have left. It might 
be useful for trips in the mine, but at this point of the game, you might not 
care about it all that much.

The rest of your life is spent keeping everyone happy in the village, and your 
spouse, and taking care that the other bachelors marry by witnessing their 
rival heart events. Not that you care anymore once you're wed yourself hm?

===============
GameShark Codes
===============

These are codes I figured out on my own, using VisualBoy Advance's memory
viewer. It took a while to figure out!

I want to first say that I don't encourage cheating at all. in fact, I
believe it kills the fun of the game. If you get everything you need 
without effort, why are you even playing the game?

I used those codes in my latest games as shortcuts to get things faster,
thus I didn't find/use codes to get unlimited money straight off, I
still work for it. 

In fact I didn't use those codes writing this guide. I actually lost my 
saved game after writing it, so I used them to try to get my game back 
to where it was.

I believe the worse part is the mines if you're aiming for completion. 
Even using the 2-save trick, it took me nearly 9 hours to get down to 
floor 255. So after losing my save, I wasn't keen on doing it again, 
honestly. Thus why I found the codes for it. 

Similarly, the Goddess game code was to avoid having to reload too often,
as that game hates me :P

Instead of 1k for Tea Leaves, you can get 10k for Pirate Treasure. Thus 
you only need to get 2 Pirate Treasures for roughly the same as you'd 
get with 4 days of Tea Leaves normally. It's a bit faster of course.

These codes in MFoMT, I have not found all equivalents in FoMT yet, but I
know that most websites carry the codes for it anyway. The girl version
codes are more rare.

How codes work is that the first 8 numbers is the 'address' of the code, 
while the next digits are the value. You can make yourself codes, but it 
might be easier to edit the value manually if you're using VBA.

Also, all of those codes should be turned off after being used. The game is
a bit funky on those, and don't allow to 'lock' values very well (for
example, unlimited energy). You should just turn them on and off for a 
quick recharge. This is especially true in the mines, the game locks up 
if you forget to turn the code off.

For Stamina boost (useful for a quick recharge in the mines mostly) :
02004205 : xx

Tool Experience 
Max out experience so you don't have to train them yourself. You can use
lower values if you want, but these bring tools all the way to Mystrile
experience, so you only need to go forge them.

Hammer : 020041F8 : FFFF
Scythe : 020041F0 : FFFF
Axe    : 020041F4 : FFFF
Hoe    : 020041EC : FFFF
Water  : 020041FC : FFFF
Rod    : 020041FE : FFFF

Goddess mini-game :
In the first 4 days you can play the game with the goddess. Start the game
normally, and when she offers you the first choice of number, input the code
(don't forget to turn it off after), and the game will think you have won XX
times :

02002240 : 00XX 

One good use of this :
- Pirate Treasure : 		02002240 : 0047 

Mines :
This code works slightly different. If you activate the code at any moment
you can move, the game will lock up for some reason.

How to use the code is slightly different as a result. Find stairs as usual,
step on them, and when you see the confirmation "Do you want to use the stairs",
activate the code. This will change the 'current floor' value to what you input,
thus the next floor will be whatever you put the code at + 1. Turn off the
code, and then say 'Yes' to go down. Game locks up if you forget to turn it
off.

The two mines are actually linked together with the same code, but with 
differet target values. So it's possible to get into the Winter mine in
any season by entering the Spring mine, find stairs, activate the code for
a Winter mine floor, and you'll end up on it. Just remember that you cannot
exit the Winter mine normally, since the lake is not frozen. So the trick is
to use the code again to return to any Spring mine floor, and use the stairs
back up toward the entrance.

The Spring Mines floors start at 003A = Floor 0 (base 57)
The Winter Mines floors start at 013A = Floor 0 (base 313)

Also, the floors are in Hexadecimal, so convert it properly first. You can use 
Windows calculator in Scientific mode for that easily. The (base) number is 
what you need to add to go to those floors.

So if you want to get to floor 100, you use 100 + 57, convert it to Hexadecimal,
and the result is 9D, that you'll use in the code. Once you used the stairs, 
you will end up on floor 100. 

Another note is that any number that is not a mine ends up on another game
map, like the village. It also locks up the game.

Lastly, you cannot go straight to floor 0 either as far as I know. Either way
you can simply use stairs up to reach it in either mine.

The Code is : 				02005d54 : XXXX

Here's a few example values that have some use.

Spring Mine (base 58)
Floor 5   : 003E (Orialcum)
Floor 6   : 003F
Floor 100 : 009D (Power Berry)
Floor 255 : 0137 (Teleport Stone)

Winter Mine : (base 314)
Floor 19  : 014C (Cursed tools on every -9 floor)
Floor 28  : 0156 
Floor 39  : 0160 

I did some hunting down for the Mine code in the boy version. It works exactly
the same, except the address is :	02005CF8 : XXXX

The values are slightly different as well. 
Spring Mine :  Floor 0 = 0034 (base 51)
Winter Mine :  Floor 0 = 0134 (base 307)

========
End Word
========
I realize now that I've restarted a new game, that knowing all I want to do as 
per what I wrote in this guide makes it tons easier on a second play. You'll 
change the order of things, and do tasks faster than I did in this guide.

So what I'm considering this guide now is a 'steady' guide. There are slower 
and faster ways of doing this, but this is a way that worked, doesn't give you 
everything that easily but doesn't make it too hard to get most of the goals 
done in the first year, which is getting all the tools to blessed, having a 
good amount of spare money and a good start on whatever else you're working 
on, like wedding/befriending.

I didn't want to make a day per day guide either. I think that this kind of 
game has the advantage of doing things like you want. Giving you the goals to 
reach and things to get your attention for a small time frame is more 
interesting as it lets you do things in the order you prefer.

I still hope you found the guide useful.

==========
Disclaimer
==========
This may be not be reproduced under any circumstances except for personal,
private use. It may not be placed on any web site or otherwise distributed
publicly without advance written permission. Use of this guide on any other web
site or as a part of any public display is strictly prohibited, and a violation
of copyright.

Permissions are granted to the following websites for use of this walkthrough. 
Any other websites is prohibited from displaying this guide :
-GameFAQs/IGN

All trademarks and copyrights contained in this document are owned by their
respective trademark and copyright holders.

===============
Version history
===============
Version : 0.2
Submitted on : 
-Added and modified a few sections for clarification purposes :
	-Weather
	-Passting Time
	-useful Tricks
-Added the Gameshark codes I figured out.

Version : 0.1
Submitted on : June 4th, 2010
 -First submission of the guide
